I’ve been stuck in this cabin for a little over a week now. I came here to get away from the city, from the dullness and the monotony of my daily job, hoping I could write my first novel here.

This was my dream ever since I was a kid. Unfortunately, my family wanted me to be a normal person with a normal job. There never was any room for dreams in my life. I just had to go to college and study business, and then get a boring 9 to 5 job at my dad’s company.

This cabin was bought by my parents for their summer vacations before I was born. They’d acquired it for the beautiful lake that’s placed behind it. To go there you had to trek through the woods. I always thought that the trees arching above you were meant to be nature’s guardians, keeping the wildlife and all things beautiful protected under a shield of green. When I was a kid, my dad used to take me fishing there. I liked it a lot.

Right until I got reeled in under the water, the fish pulled so hard that I fell overboard.

I didn’t know how to swim, but luckily my dad jumped in and pulled me back to the surface, otherwise I’d have drowned and died. Even to this day, I never learned how to swim because from that day on the fear of going into deep waters just stuck with me.

Another unsettling thing I realized I loathed from that day on was the fact that we always stopped in the middle of the lake for fishing. We were surrounded by what seemed like a huge eye of water that made me think about monsters and horror living at the bottom. I remember always thinking what if there was another world there, another civilization that was able to live and breathe underwater.

There’s another thing that happened that day though. As I was going under I felt something touch my feet. I don’t know if it was pushing me up to my dad so he could get me out of the murky waters, or dragging me down to the depths of a liquid hellish nightmare.

Adding to the terror that was already building up, I lost my calm and as I felt water entering my mouth, flooding my lungs and silencing my screams, I began to panic. Before dad pulled me up, I turned around to see if it was just my imagination and then I completely forgot about it for the rest of my life.

Until I came back here.

Since I started writing, I always liked to do it in utter and complete silence and this cabin had that to it. It provided me the comfort I needed to get inside my own mind and to pull out the characters and the settings, the monsters, the villains and the heroes of my stories. Maybe to write about my own experiences too.

They say that the best stories come from the writer’s personal fears, so that was exactly what I wanted to write about.

It’s somewhat unique to see a setting change so fast from day to night. The chirping of birds made the outside feel so alive during the day, and the colors of nature complemented that so very well.

When the night came though, it felt like all just suddenly died down, or maybe it all went into hiding, giving way or, rather, allowing for something else to come alive. All the colors faded away, swallowed whole by the darkness of the night, lost for hours in the solemn silence.

Then everything came back to life the next morning.

The first couple of nights were just that. Silence. Nothing more and nothing less. I got ten pages done and I was very proud of myself. I thought it was the best decision I had made in regards to writing the new book.

Then, things started getting strange. In the stillness of the night, I began hearing sloshing footsteps circling my house. Whenever I peeked outside the window, there was nothing there. I was only hearing the rustling of leaves that seemed to cry out for help only for their screams to never exit from that side of the woods.

A coyote was howling somewhere in the distance, as if it wanted to let me know of some newly formed danger that was there with me, taking its time on how it would’ve been best to attack me.

I heart the mud moving again. Staccato footsteps thumping like a soggy drumline. It was an ocean sound, the kind of music that crawls out from deep, lost places. The song you’d hear before drowning.

Still nothing outside. Only blackness.

I heard a knock on the front door. Then another. And another. Someone was trying to break inside my house. The knocking turned into violent bangings.

Then it suddenly stopped. Silence again throughout the night; it didn’t last long though. A pained shriek of agony pierced through the dark veil of the night and I felt my house moving from the shock. With it, I too trembled in unspeakable horror.

The trees started shaking and the ground trembled again. This was making me mad. This was driving me insane as I felt a lost, ancient curse finally found a new host to torment.

I looked outside again. Then I saw something. Lengthy arms finishing in dark chromium-like claws were extending from beyond the tree line. They were rapidly advancing towards the cabin. Tens if not possibly hundreds of them clawing their way in through the mud. I was a sitting duck.

When they reached the house, I asked myself what was at the other end? What could the creatures that these clawed arms belonged to looked like? They started intertwining, slithering and snaking their way over the roof and finally breaking the windows.

I froze like a statue. Kept in place by my fear and rendered unable to move. I heard a thump outside and then the woods vibrated with a loud metallic hum that reverberated throughout the whole area.

The arms retracted instantly from the cabin. They dragged the claws onto the floor, splinters and woods jumping in every direction. The sound was unbearable, almost like someone screamed into my ears.

Then a drumming sound filled the air, followed by another loud metallic hum. I heard a large quantity of water splashing in the woods nearby. I instantly thought of a flood made by a gigantic rock dropped by a dark god from the furthest point of the cosmos.

The earth started shaking and the leaves were rustling. Gigantic footsteps were cracking down on the trees, laying them flat on the ground. I heard shrieks and screams of anguish and agony. It seemed like the night was hurt and bleeding. Almost dying.

Something, some other creature was attacking the monstrosities that were just in my house.

The wailing suddenly stopped for a few seconds, then a roar filled the night again. The front door was violently smashed opened and another arm was heading towards me. At an impossible speed, it wrapped itself around me. Like a snake suffocating its prey, it squeezed me so hard that I lost conscience.

I woke up to the sound of my body being dragged through the mud. Things were slithering next to me and I knew what they were.

They were taking me to the lake. To drown me. To eat me.

Their claws slowly begin tearing my skin and parting the flesh on my arms. I felt the sharp pain coursing through my body, as warm blood was getting lost in the mud. I managed to raise my head up from the ground and parallel to me there was the shape of a creature. Following alongside, its red eyes never seemed to lose sight of me.

It was probably their leader. The thing that have would me for dinner in the kingdom below the lake. It would eat my flesh, drink my blood and spit out the bones.

I watched in horror both at the lake and at the creature trekking through the trees. At that very moment, it occurred to me how lucky I was of escaping death by drowning when I was just a child. I knew for sure that the things tried to pull me to the depths right then.

Now I wasn’t so sure I would make it out alive. In fact, I was one hundred percent sure my death would be slow and agonizingly painful. Another claw hit me in the face and momentarily blinked me. The red-eyed monster disappeared from sight and I felt my body entering the cold waters of the lake.

This was it. My demise. My end.

I tried to break free but to no avail. The arms were wrapped around me, their pointy claws pushing against my skin. I was under the waters, the light coming from the moon being the only thing that shone through this place where all sound dies.

On the brink of unconsciousness, I felt things getting stuck and sucking on my skin. I tried to move but the arms were still wrapped around me.

I felt the last breath of air escaping my lungs and getting lost in this infinite watery darkness in the form of bubbles.

Right before dying, right before I got a chance to see if there was a light at the end of the tunnel, the arms let me go. I felt them going back to the depths, scared.

Something pulled me up again from the water and onto the shore. It started resuscitating me. I began coughing, water jumping out from my lungs and splashing my face. My dad saved me again; except he was different this time. He had red eyes and he was just a shadow made of water. I tried speaking to him but found out I couldn’t do it.

“I’m not your dad, I’m just a monster. I saved you then and I saved you now, child. You are safe now, those things can’t hurt you ever again,” the creature said.

I froze in fear upon realizing that it was the same creature that followed me when the arms dragged me underneath the murky waters. He was in pain, his breathing hissed, and black blood the texture of mud dripped from his mouth and onto the ground below.

He told me he wouldn’t hurt me but he too needed help. His name was just that, Monster. He’s been there in the lake since forever. Since before the world even existed. He was protecting the woods and the lake itself from those things that attacked me.

The Monster told me he doesn’t know what they are. Or when they first appeared. Whenever they feel fresh blood near the lake they want to want to kill. They need to feed.

The creatures were always strongest during the night time, he also added. That’s why I probably escaped that day. With a little help from him too. For that, I’ll be grateful for the rest of my life.

He said he needed to rest somewhere where warm water exists. His wounds would’ve healed quickly; he was immortal after all. I suggested the bathtub back at my cabin and he agreed.

I turned the water on and I saw kindness and solitude burning in his red eyes. He looked at me like he owned me one, when in fact he was the one who saved my life twice.

“Thank you so very much, child. You are a kind soul. I am forever in your debt…” he said while letting out a grunt of satisfaction upon placing himself in the tub.

“No, Monster. You saved my life twice. I am indebted to you for all eternity and beyond,” I replied.

I turned around to leave and before doing so he asked me to come close to him. He gave me an emerald talisman, a powerful ancient artifact that would keep me safe from the things that lurk below the murky waters.

“You will be a fine writer; I can already see it. Please, can you write about me? I feel like no one knows me. Except you, of course…” he said, a sigh of hurt escaping his mouth.

I nodded and closed the door. I slept like a baby that night. It was like nothing ever happened. Maybe the amulet that Monster gave me helped me heal faster.

The next morning, I went up to the bathroom to see if he was still there. He was not. The water was filled with moss and algae that danced slowly in what looked like a miniature lake trapped inside a bathtub.

I sighed and thanked him once again, wherever he was in that lake.

Now people will know about you.

[Thousands of people will know about you, Monster.](https://www.reddit.com/r/PostMortem33/comments/gpnh5h/story_masterpost/)

[TCC](https://www.reddit.com/r/TheCrypticCompendium/comments/jvvtav/author_database/)It’s Eli. Okay, great, got that out of the way. Now the good stuff.

You know how I [said](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/lzwof4/my_city_has_been_cut_off_from_the_world_and/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web2x&context=3) that I intended to find out what the hell Tristan’s deal was? Well, good news: I did. Bad news: he still won’t tell us the part that would actually be SUPER HELPFUL, because he’s being an ass.

Here’s how it’s been going. He’s still staying at the bookstore, and even Zoe isn’t a big fan of his anymore. We’ve given him one of the extra storage rooms upstairs to sleep in; we brought in a sleeping bag and the two pillows Waffles doesn’t like and everything. At first, I tried talking about a lot of my good memories with Nolan, but that honestly seemed to make things worse, because Tristan always found a way to twist them into my bad influence on his brother or how annoying we’d been acting from his point of view. 

Yeah, he’s kind of a buzzkill.

I’ve tried not to let it get to me when he makes his hatred of me clear, but it’s hard. He’s never liked me; he *says* it’s because of the bad influence thing, but Nolan and I were always pretty well-behaved, even as teenagers. We snuck out a few times, went to parties occasionally, but we didn’t do anything crazy. Definitely nothing that would brand me as a bad influence. Maybe it goes all the way back to kindergarten when I hit Nolan in the head with a doll. Maybe *that’s* what he means. 

Either way, what I’m trying to say is that Tristan disliking me isn’t anything new. But I’ve tried not to hold it against him; I always made jokes with him and started conversations when I was over at Nolan’s house. (Come to think of it, that might’ve made him hate me more…oops). Still, I think it’s gotten worse. I swear to God, he’s giving me a constant death glare for about eight hours a day. I don’t know how his facial muscles are strong enough to hold that much focused hatred, but damn, they sure are. It’s his signature expression: the Death Glare™.

After a day or two of Tristan shooting down my efforts, Zoe had shifted her opinion of him too. As we crawled under the blankets on the second night and she took off her glasses, she said, “I really tried giving him the benefit of the doubt, but he kind of sucks. He’s such a dick to you. The way he acts, you’d think *you* murdered Nolan.”

“I know,” I said, settling on the mattress beside her. “He’s always been like that. What’s the opposite of a fan? Because he’s the president of that club.”

“Maybe he’s just jealous that Nolan likes you better than him,” she said sleepily. 

“Maybe,” I agreed. Then she scooted over and laid her head on my chest, and Mr. Bailey curled up against my leg, so Tristan being an asshole suddenly seemed like a much less important problem.

And yet, he’s still here. Why he wants to be is anyone’s guess. Honestly, I think he was hurt in the massacre more than he wants to admit and knows he’ll be killed if he goes off on his own. I see him wince when he moves. 

His presence here means that some of our conversation practices have gotten weirder. Zoe and I talk privately in the soundproof room most of the time; whenever we talk to him in the bookstore, we make sure it’s nothing important about our next moves or plans. But that means that we have to invite him into the soundproof room with us when we want to interrogate him, and I don’t think a single one of us is a fan of that.

It took four days to find out what he was hiding from us. Four days of jabs at me, insults, pointed silence. It was really great. (That was sarcasm, in case my meaning wasn’t clear through text. It was not a pleasant experience). You know, as awesome as Nolan was/is – I’m holding out hope for the *is* – you’d really think his brother would be less of a pain. But no.

And look, I get it. He’s never liked me anyway, he got swallowed by a bear, he’s worried about Nolan. But it’s not like I’ve had an easy life in the past year either, and I’d like to find Nolan just as much as Tristan would. So, I think he needs to get over himself. 

But I digress. On that day, Zoe, Tristan and I were all in the soundproof room. Zoe and I were sitting on the mattress, and Tristan had taken my old spot in the desk chair. He was mostly brooding and silent, giving me his steady Death Glare™ while Zoe and I talked. That is, until we reached our daily topic of searching for the elevator. Like he had every day before that when we started our escape discussions, Tristan let his Death Glare™ slip for just a second, and that same flash of knowing something and considering saying something but deciding not to appeared. It infuriated me every time, because I’d always point it out, and Tristan would simply tell me to fuck off. 

Not wanting to break tradition, when I saw his expression shift, I said, “Hey Tristan, what do you know that you’re not telling us?”

He immediately responded with the usual, “Fuck off,” but this time it seemed more forced. He also didn’t put back on the Death Glare™ mask right away; he actually seemed to be mulling something over. I could practically see the gears turning in his head.

After a few seconds of silence, I figured he’d decided against it. I sighed and said, “Okay, well, it’s probably more likely to be in the –”

“I think I know where it is,” Tristan interrupted. His voice was quiet but firm. Zoe and I both stared at him in shock. “The elevator. I think I saw it,” he continued.

Then, on that cliffhanger, he fucking paused. I waited for him to add on, but apparently that was as far as he was getting without prompting. “Well, where the hell is it?” I exclaimed.

“You know, Nolan and I listened to our parents die,” he said. He sounded more dazed now, like he was letting his mind drift to the faraway reaches he hadn’t been to in a while. If he was repressing his traumas as much as I was, he probably hadn’t. His eyes, too, seemed to be looking at something far in the distance. 

I turned to look at Zoe and threw my hands up in a universal *What the fuck is this!?* gesture, but she simply shrugged and held a finger to her lips. She was probably right; maybe if we just let him talk, he’d get to the point. As much as I didn’t want to hear about Nolan’s parents (RIP Mr. and Mrs. Reynolds, you were great) or whatever Nolan may have suffered, I could handle it, and I *did* want to hear about Tristan’s possible knowledge of the elevator. If he was telling the truth, that info was worth the wait.

“I was sleeping when it started, because I’d worked the overnight shift at IHOP, like every Friday. My parents were downstairs, having coffee in the kitchen. It was Saturday, after all. Nolan was home for the weekend from college; you know that. He was gonna hang out with you later that day,” Tristan said, looking at me, although I wasn’t sure he was actually seeing me. “God, I wish he hadn’t come home that weekend. If he wasn’t in the city, he’d be fine now.” He sighed heavily, almost shakily.

“Tristan’s lived with their parents and worked different jobs since he graduated high school five years ago,” I whispered to Zoe. “First Pizza Hut, then Staples, now IHOP. Nolan went to college a few hours away and came home about once or twice a month. We would always meet up when he visited.”

Zoe nodded but didn’t take her eyes off Tristan, who seemed to be gearing up to speak again. 

“I didn’t hear any of the first part. I’m a pretty heavy sleeper,” he said. “But suddenly Nolan was shaking me awake violently. I started to yell at him and ask him what the fuck he thought he was doing, but he slapped a hand over my mouth and told me to be quiet. Before I could protest or bite him – because I was going to – he hissed at me that he’d heard crashes and screams downstairs. He’d been in his room and started running for the stairs, to go down and help our parents, but dad yelled, ‘BOYS, HIDE! DON’T COME DOWN HERE!’ and Nolan said he sounded both so authoritative and so scared that Nolan *had* to listen. 

“By then I was pretty awake, obviously. I could hear muffled crashes and scuffling from downstairs, but it was hard to determine what they were, because Nolan was frantically whispering over and over that we had to stay quiet, we had to hide, and after a minute or so I shoved him off and said, ‘Okay, okay, fine, come on.’ I didn’t totally believe him. I kinda thought he was trying to prank me. But I figured I’d give him the benefit of the doubt and play along for at least a few minutes. Just in case it was real.”

I couldn’t resist. “You *asshole,*” I said. “Nolan was terrified, and you thought he was pranking you?”

His eyes cleared, and he looked at me with the kind of venom generally reserved for looking at serial killers or people who kick puppies. “It wouldn’t be the first time,” he defended himself. “When you two were together, you used to –”

“I wasn’t even there!” I exploded. “And we would *never* do anything like that! Our pranks were, like, sending you texts from fake subscription services! Nothing that would ever mess with emotions or drag your parents in!”

Zoe put a hand on my shoulder. “Calm down,” she said quietly. “It’s not worth it. Don’t you want to hear what he knows?” To Tristan, she raised her voice and said, “He didn’t mean it. About your parents and Nolan…you were saying?”

Tristan gave me one final Death Glare™, but at Zoe’s words, he seemed to remember that he did actually want to talk about his trauma. Maybe it was therapeutic for him. Probably he was imagining he was just talking to Zoe, and that I wasn’t here at all.

“Anyway, if you’ll *let me talk* now, I was saying that Nolan and I hurried into my closet. We crawled back behind my shoes, closed the door, and crouched there together in the dark corner. We didn’t really fit. I told him to scoot over, and he whispered that he couldn’t. His voice was shaking.

“That’s when I began to believe him, because once we were quiet, I could hear what was happening downstairs better. There was some weird howl-screech sound that sent shivers down my spine, more crashes, my parents yelling. I swear I even heard distant singing. It all made my head hurt. At first it sounded like my parents were fighting, but then the screams were full of pain. Nolan looked at me in the dark, and he whispered, ‘We have to go help them. Is it a break-in? We can get dad’s gun from the office. We have to help them!’ and I said, ‘No. We can’t.’

“I held him back. He struggled at first, but after a minute or two, he quieted down. He was crying quietly into my shirt. As we sat there and he cried, the sounds faded. The screams cut off in a horrible way that definitely meant bad news, and the crashes ceased. I heard heavy footsteps, and then it was quiet.”

He paused again, and I could have sworn his eyes were wet, though no tears fell. Even Tristan couldn’t be a dick when he was remembering his parents’ death. Say what you will about his relationship to me, but he did care about his family, especially his parents. This time I said nothing, because a sense of dread had settled over me; hearing about Mr. and Mrs. Reynolds’ death was stirring up all the awful memories of my own family’s deaths. And in my case, I hadn’t just listened to it – I’d *watched* them happen.

(Honestly, though, I wasn’t feeling as unstable as usual thinking about that horrible day, so maybe my mental health really is improving. If that’s true, I guess I have Zoe to thank for that).

Tristan took a deep breath and continued. “I pushed Nolan away and said, ‘Stay here. I’m going down to look’ and he grabbed my arm and told me he was coming too. So, I went and grabbed my dad’s gun, and then we started slowly down the stairs.

“It was eerily quiet. We’d only made it down the first few steps before we saw the blood spatters on the walls. There were literally sprays of blood across our family photos hanging by the stairs. The smell was terrible. We stepped down into the living room, and there were blood and body parts and glass pieces everywhere. Nolan started crying again when he saw it. 

“There were no bodies, though. ‘The kitchen,’ I said. Nolan shook his head but followed me. I wasn’t wearing any shoes, and in just a few steps, my feet were slick with blood and cut up with glass shards. It was worse than stepping on Legos.”

Apparently, this was a joke, because he looked up at us expectantly. Zoe caught on quicker than I did and gave a little laugh; I just stared at him. He rolled his eyes at me – it was specifically at *me,* I could tell – and looked back at Zoe before continuing.

“The kitchen was awful. My dad’s body were there – well, whatever wasn’t on the walls and spread across the living room, anyway. The back door was open, with a trail of blood leading out there. I followed it, and from the doorway I could see my mom’s body on the patio. It was less torn apart than my dad’s, but there was still a lot of blood. And her head was…gone. I think it exploded, because I’m pretty sure I saw bits of brain matter on the bushes. 

“Suddenly from behind me, Nolan yelled, ‘TRISTAN!’ and I spun around to see some tall, skinless thing climbing through the shattered front window. I raised the gun and started firing, but I only hit its torso, and that didn’t slow it down too much. ‘The eyes! Its eyes look weird! Try those!’ Nolan shouted, scrambling halfway up the stairs.

“The thing kept coming, and it let out that screech I’d heard earlier. I don’t know if it had just left our house but saw us moving around in there, or if it was still there the whole time. But now it started charging towards me. I aimed more carefully and shot for its eyes. I was just hoping Nolan’s hunch was right.”

“It was,” I said quietly. “Nolan always was great at noticing details. He was gonna study microbiology or genetics or something super science-y like that. He would’ve been a kickass scientist.”

Zoe reached out and squeezed my hand. Tristan gave me the signature Death Glare™. “I know,” he said. “He was always the smarter kid of the two of us.”

“Doesn’t take much,” I muttered under my breath. Zoe dug her nails in to my hand and raised her eyebrows at me; she was clearly telling me to shut up and stop provoking him. I rolled my eyes but stayed silent, because to be honest, I did want to hear where this was going and how it circled back to him supposedly knowing about the elevator.

“Anyway, I aimed and shot for its eyes – or the hole where its eye would have been. And *that* worked. The thing screeched and fell to its side. Some kind of thick, purple liquid oozed down its face. I shot again, aiming for its other eye and then for its neck, and after both those shots, it finally stopped moving and laid there on the kitchen floor next to my dad.

“Nolan and I just kind of stared at each other in shock. ‘What the hell *are* they?’ he asked. ‘I have no idea,’ I said. Out the window, we heard more screams and roars and howls; I saw glimpses of people running by, of creatures I’d never seen before in the street. I was afraid one of them might see us through the window, so I grabbed Nolan’s arm and pulled him upstairs. We went into my parents’ bedroom, pulled down all the blinds and curtains, and turned on the TV. 

“The local news was showing footage of monsters and bodies and a giant dome, which they said had cut off the city. Lines of cars stretched down the highway trying to get out; it was literally broadcast live as monsters mowed them down like they were blades of grass. Then the news helicopter was hit by something, I guess, because there were screams, and then the screen went to static.

“I turned it off and we sat there in silence. ‘What the fuck is happening? Why here?’ Nolan asked. ‘I don’t know,’ I told him. ‘But we can’t get out of the city. So we’ll have to manage here.’

“‘It’s like the apocalypse,’ he said. I didn’t have a response to that. We just packed up our bags and prepared to leave. We spent the night there, but we didn’t feel safe with the destroyed downstairs, and we didn’t want to stay there with our parents’ bodies. It made Nolan start to cry again every time we had to cross the kitchen to get food. So we left the next morning.”

“I just missed you, then,” I said. “I tried to come find Nolan, you know. I went to your house on the second day, and several times after that. I saw your parents. But I never saw any signs of you.”

He didn’t miss a beat, the asshole. “In that case, thank God we left,” he said. “Nolan was better off than me than he would’ve been with you.”

“I don’t know,” I retorted. “*I’m* not the one who got eaten by a Mike. I’ve been surviving the whole time.”

“That’s *enough,* boys*,*” interjected Zoe. 

Tristan shot me yet another Death Glare™ and said, “Well, after that, we spent the next few months moving around, killing monsters, staying alive. It won’t surprise you to know that Nolan, despite everything, thought the monsters were fascinating. He always said that if the situation were different, if he could’ve looked at them in a lab, he would’ve loved to study their biology. But I wasn’t about to let him drag in a monster body off the street to look at.”

“It could’ve helped you fight them if you knew more about them,” offered Zoe gently.

Tristan frowned at her. “Yeah, but I wasn’t about to bring one of them home with us. What if any of them reanimated and killed us in our sleep? Not to mention the fact that Nolan noticed a camera in one of their bodies pretty early on. Once we knew about the cameras, even Nolan agreed we shouldn’t be messing with the monsters more than we had to.

“He was still good at finding their weaknesses, though. We were a great team,” he said thoughtfully. “He studied them when he could and figured out how to kill them, and I handled the actual killing. You know, I think those couple of months were the best we’d gotten along since we were kids. Just us against the world. No one else.” He shot me an accusatory look. Seems like Zoe may have been on to something with that jealousy thing.

Tristan also *still* hadn’t mentioned anything about the elevator, and I was getting antsy. Was it a lie so that he had an excuse to keep our attention while talking through his traumas? Did he just want to get our hopes up and then crush them? I wouldn’t put it past him.

“What about the elevator?” I prompted. 

Tristan sighed. “I think I saw it the day before we ran across the bear. We were out on a supply run, and I insisted on going a different way than we’d planned. It made Nolan nervous and he said we should stick to the plan, but there were a lot of monsters along that route. I told him we were switching paths, and he could either come with me or I’d leave him behind. After a while he followed me.

“But then I heard a lot of growling and kind of a mechanical squealing from this building, and I peeked inside to investigate, and I saw a room open up, with big sliding door like an elevator. I mean, I didn’t think of it an as elevator at the time, but that *is* what it looked like. And monsters poured out of it. The elevator must have been wall-to-wall packed. Once the room was empty, the doors closed…and I heard the whirring as the elevator went back down. 

“I wanted to go look closer right then, but Nolan was freaking out. He kept saying that he *told* me we shouldn’t have come this way, look what we’d stumbled into. I said, ‘It might be a way out!’ and he said, ‘We can’t know that without studying it more. We can’t just run into it! We have to watch first and only go when we know it’s safe. That’s what you made me do when mom and dad died, remember? You were right then and I’m right now.’

“Of course I listened. He’s the smart one. But when we tried to go back the next day…well, that’s when the bear got me.” Tristan shook his head. “It was the first time Nolan got a guess wrong. We’d never met one of those fuckers before. As soon as we met it, Nolan froze and whispered, ‘It must hunt by sight. Look at its giant eyes.’”

I was nodding as he said this, because if *I* had managed to put that together during my first encounter with a Mike, there’s no way Nolan hadn’t. 

“Then he said, ‘It must have blind spots. I bet it’s like a horse. Can’t see a short distance directly in front of it, or directly behind it. We just have to get close enough to get in its blind spots, and the rest is easy.’ That sounded legitimate to me – he’d never been wrong before – but I still wanted to protect him best I could. He is my little brother. So, I volunteered for the front blind spot, since that seemed riskier, and I told him to take the back.

“It was waiting – it had seen us move right before we froze. We both took off sprinting at the same time, in opposite directions. As soon as it pursued me, I turned around to run right back towards it, hoping that I could get into the blind spot between its eyes and kill it. Nolan immediately turned around, too, and started coming up behind it; I couldn’t see him, but I heard him. 

“The bear’s breath was hot and heavy. I raised the gun and aimed for its eyes – but the eyes never left me. There *wasn’t* a blind spot. I tried to fire, but it swatted the gun right out of my hand like it was light as a feather. And I didn’t have time to do anything else before it lunged forward and pinned me to the ground. Then the mouth opened wider and wider, and the black hole started to drag me in…” He trailed off, shivering. I’d never seen Tristan look so vulnerable, not even when he was covered in blood back at the scene of the massacre.

“I kept hoping Nolan would be able to kill it as I was sucked into the darkness. I heard him trying: there were gunshots, and he was calling, ‘I’ll save you, Tristan!’, sounding more and more desperate. But then the noises were gone, and there was nothing but empty blackness. 

“I thought it got him too, but he must have escaped somehow. I don’t think he killed it, since I had to wait for *you* to free me,” he said with disdain, looking at me. “But maybe he at least had the common sense to freeze and wait it out when he realized he couldn’t kill it. Maybe it got away and he’s been looking for it since.”

He finally went silent, and it seemed he was done for good this time. I was silent for a minute too, thinking. I’d worried the same thing when I was facing the Mike to save Zoe. It chilled my blood to think that the exact fear I’d had about never being able to find the same Mike again may have been a reality for my best friend.

But then there was still the fucking elevator. Tristan had been intentionally vague when describing that part. No mention of a specific location. If he thought I’d missed that, he was insane. I may not be as good with details as Nolan, but a blind man could’ve noticed the gaping holes in *that* story.

“What about the elevator?” I asked again. “Don’t you think that’s our best bet at getting out of here?”

Tristan gave me – you guessed it – the certified Death Glare™ and said, “Maybe. But I don’t care. I don’t want to help you. I just want to find Nolan.”

I threw my hands up in frustration. “Yeah, but so do I! You may not like it, but I’m at least as close to him as you ever were. We’ll help search for him if you tell us where the goddamn elevator is. Don’t you want to get out of this hellscape too?”

The asshole had the audacity to smirk at me. That’s when I realized: he was enjoying this. He was taking pleasure in the fact that he had leverage over me. You know how I said I don’t hate him? Yeah, I might be taking that back.

“Fine, I’ll tell you,” he said, still smirking. His eyes never left mine. “On one condition. I want to talk to you, Eli. Alone.”My mother had a cat named Thimble who stalked me when I was a child. I was ten or so at the time, and I had just witnessed my first death in the family.

I say Thimble “stalked” me, because it was obvious she was following me around, but she chose not to come too close, always a little distance away, on the couch or in the middle of the carpet, watching me.

She wouldn’t come over to lie at my feet or jump onto my lap. She wouldn’t respond to anyone calling her. She just sat there, placidly, looking at me.

Every now and then, those gold-flecked green eyes would dart over my shoulder and then to me, back and forth, like someone was waving a laser pointer around my head that only she could see. But she would make no further move. She would watch me in silence until she grew heavy-lidded with drowsiness and settled down on her paws to snooze, still in the middle of the carpet.

It became a kind of family tradition, an expectation that if anyone were looking for her, they would find her next to me.

I can still find old photographs, candid shots of myself as a young boy in Sunday clothes seated at the table in the foreground, glancing to the side, where Thimble sat on the floor a little way into the distance like she hadn’t been invited and wanted us to know she was displeased about it. Her dispassionate little face would be turned my way, as if she were tasked to supervise me and found it an especially dull job, but one she took seriously.

Years later, when she was old and dying, I visited her little den at the bottom of a bookcase where my mother had covered the opening with an embroidered, tasseled cloth. I would pull back the cloth and peer into the darkness as though spying into a shrine, or a sacred little grave site for the still-living.

I would find the gently heaving mound of fur, lying prone and stiff, facing away from the entrance, and gaze at her white and ginger coat half-glowing in the dim space.

Just as I determined she was still breathing, a hand would yank me back roughly by the collar—usually my mother or Nan or my eldest brother scolding me about disturbing her, reminding me about how cats needed to be alone when they were nearing their end. The cloth would be respectfully replaced, and I would be kicked out into the sunshine.

Dying alone. It always seemed such an unbearably sad way for someone to go, I thought. So I kept checking, kept getting in trouble for it. *She’ll never die peacefully at this rate*, my mother would say.

She meant to emphasize the peacefulness or the lack of it, but I focused on the death. I thought if I visited Thimble enough, I could disturb her—distract her—out of dying. She had been in the den three days. She should have died much earlier, I heard. So it must have been working.

On the afternoon of the fourth day, certain that there was nobody close by, I lifted the shroud and glanced in, pretending to check on her water dish.

Thimble had moved for the first time, lying on her other side so that her face was toward me, her paws stretched straight out, and seemingly already stiff with death.

But as I watched her closed-up face, her eyes slowly opened, the secondary eyelid a moment delayed so that for a second or so her eyes were entirely and then partly white and shielded.

She looked otherworldly, possessed. But now her eyes were open, her faded green pupils contracting to slits from the light of the hall. She stared sleepily at me without expression or pain, or even recognition.

And then, just like all the times in the past I’ve grown accustomed to, her gaze flicked over my shoulder as though someone were there trying to get her attention.

But of course there was nobody there. There never was anybody there, every time I’d ever looked behind me in my childhood. Just as surely as I had grown used to this glance, I had grown secure in the knowledge that there was nothing, that there would never be anything, and that this was just something odd that all cats did.

This time, however, there was a small difference in how she behaved, a slight difference but one I remember clearly and with apprehension, knowing what I know now.

She flicked her tail and narrowed her eyes, as though she were annoyed. Her ear twitched, her tail flicked once, twice, then fell still. She did not glance back at me; her eyes were now glazed and unseeing over my shoulder. The faint light of defiance in the graceful lines of her face dimmed out, and her breathing returned to its steady, slow pace, until she ceased to move again.

I scrambled up to run and find someone and announce Thimble’s death. I don’t remember feeling anything in particular other than a mild pang and, at the end, a vague curiosity.

I never got to understand her. Cats die with their secrets.

\* \* \*

Hers was the second death I had ever witnessed, and she would be the first of many. The first was my strange Grandma Lisbeth from Dad’s side of the family. You could say she started everything.

I was nine going on ten. Thimble had just been brought into the house as a kitten; her stalking would begin a few months later. I would never be the same after Grandma came to live with us for the short time we had known her, but I didn’t know it at the time. Thimble would be the first to notice what had changed.

For reasons withheld from us, my parents had kept Grandma Lisbeth away from the family when we were growing up, and as far as I know, Grandma never made an attempt to connect with her estranged son and the grandchildren she had never met. There was some talk about her being “difficult,” even before she had been widowed, and my parents didn’t want us growing up with that sort of damage. So we never got to know her; she never got to know us.

Then toward the end of her life, she made a sudden, mysterious introduction into our home. She was dying, our father explained to us, and she was alone. Nobody should ever die alone.

So she was given the guest room upstairs, and so far gone was she that I don’t think we’ve really ever *met* in any real sense of the word. We might have been vague presences flitting about her room, sent up to check on her for all she was aware. All we knew of her in life before her illness were what little our parents spoke of her, and what survived in photo albums, just one face among other strangers dead before we were born.

Just like with Thimble, I was the last to see her alive.

Knowing what I know now, I turn the scene over in my mind every so often, wondering what I could have done to change how things would turn out. I still wonder whether any of it had been my fault, or if I had just been at the wrong place, wrong time.

I remember the chill of the air, the dim light behind the curtains in the guest room where Grandma Lisbeth had died. In the weeks leading up to her death, she had gone completely unresponsive. The family had taken to visiting her in turns. It had been a few weeks of no change, no improvement. She was in a coma, a vegetable. It had been my turn to be sent upstairs to check on whether she (to put it bluntly) had “left yet.”

*Not yet*, I realized, watching the glass fog up on the tiny pocket mirror I held up by her nose the way I was taught to do. We couldn’t even tell she was breathing under those blankets.

But just as I was about to head off and report the lack of change to my parents, Grandma made a sound—the kind of sound I imagined she might have made when she was so angry she lost her words but not her voice. The sound was dry, scratchy, a bit warped and lower down in her throat than I expected it to be. But the anger, I felt, was there.

I had frozen in place and turned back around. Her eyes were wide open, glassy, staring at the ceiling. I had recently learned the term *death rattle*, which I had read somewhere in a book, and wondered if this was it.

Gingerly I crept over with the mirror to see if I could catch her last breath. But just as I reached out, her hand shot out and found my wrist, the only sudden movement—in fact the only real movement—she had made for days. She held on, her frailty leaving her for a moment so that her hand on mine was like the talons of a bird of prey.

I dropped the mirror in shock and pain, and it bounced once on the duvet and stayed there, blinking back the dim light at me.

I couldn’t make a sound. Her eyes were still wide and glassy, points of pale-green light reflected in her irises like the mirror lying on the duvet, and now they were looking at me. Or at least in my direction. I couldn’t tell if she could even register my presence much less recognize me.

Neither her hand nor her eyes let me go.

The sound came again from her throat, whispery now, like she was trying to tell me something without being able to move her lips, like she was trapped in her own failing body trying to reach out to me for help. The idea of it frightened me more than the fact that she was dying—or the fact that she was already dead, that she had died looking into my eyes, her hand on mine.

Helplessly, struck mute, I stared back until the noise died away; the twin points of light glimmered out and her eyes were as flat to me as those of a fish. Her hand did not loosen from my wrist. Already they were tightening in rigor mortis.

She had escaped her body with her last breath, but now I was the trapped one. I remember distinctly that I wished I had left the door open.

Eventually my family found me, standing there by the bed, stock-still and unable to speak for several moments. I had moved my hand to rest on top of Grandma Lisbeth’s, as though to console her, but the lifelessness of her skin had stopped me cold, and I had made no effort to pry myself free.

They figured I was in shock. I had apparently been there for all of ten minutes, but that number meant nothing to me. I don’t remember feeling afraid, but I felt that something had changed, and I wasn’t sure I liked it.

For most of my childhood I had locked that scene out of memory, able to recall it now with little signs of trauma, as just an odd fact of my personal history.

I had never drawn a connection between Grandma Lisbeth and Thimble. Even at that age, I had witnessed the “crossing over” more times than anyone in my family, but I only realized this the moment I burst into the living room to find my family and tell them the cat had finally died.

One of my elder brothers had made a snide comment, perhaps miffed he hadn’t caught me bothering Thimble when it had been his job to watch me. He said, “I see the angel of death has another report for us.”

It was such a toss-away comment it was easy to dismiss it at the time and simply focus on the task at hand of finding a shoebox to bury Thimble in. But thinking back on it, I realize he was right.

Grandma had only been able to die when I was in the room, and the same thing happened with Thimble. I didn’t know why that was until I witnessed the next death.

\* \* \*

The following summer after Thimble died, my mother gave birth to our youngest brother, making us a family of five boys. He almost didn’t make it—cord around the neck—but finally came through with apparently no further problems. That close brush with death, and the fact that he was born sickly, as most fifth children are, made him the darling of the family.

I for one showed no special affection for the newest sibling, who was named Tod, yet he clung to me the most outside of our mother. He hadn’t even taken much to Nan, whom we all loved in that distant, hesitant way of young boys. Naturally, my mother encouraged this bond between us brothers and often left young Tod in my care.

At thirteen months, Tod hadn’t yet learned to speak. One weekend morning, I almost wished he could. I had been tasked to help Nan feed him while he sat imprisoned in his highchair at the kitchen table. All he could do to protest was wave his arms about and gurgle whenever I was successful in getting a half spoon of gloop past his defenses.

Nan sighed and got up from the table to go find a clean washcloth. Once she had gone, I relaxed in my efforts. And then I noticed that Tod had gone silent too. I glanced at him, relieved, but his expression gave me pause.

He was looking intently at me as though confused by what he was seeing. It was almost comical seeing a worry crease on a baby’s forehead, like seeing an infant dressed up in a businessman’s suit and tie. He was gazing into my face, for once not responding to my smile, and then, as if perfectly trained by the cat Thimble, who had died before he was born, he glanced over my shoulder.

I turned and saw the creeping white roses of our wallpaper, dimmed by my shadow. Nothing else.

I looked back around. Tod continued to watch, flicking his eyes to something just a little behind my head, something completely insensible to me.

He would not, of course, answer any of my questions as to what he was seeing. Nan came into the kitchen then, happy at how I had gotten Tod to behave. I was rather unnerved and said nothing. As soon as I picked up the spoon, Tod went reassuringly berserk again.

That would be the first time of many that I would catch him staring at me and over my shoulder, and I had to learn all over again not to look, to get used to the fact that I would not find anything.

But I was no longer sure that there was nothing. I still maintain that Thimble had been more intelligent than a toddler, but somehow I had to take the knowing glance of a human being a little more seriously than that of a cat, whose ways are always easily misconstrued by people.

For years I never sensed anything off about Tod aside from that glance, and neither did anybody else. He never glanced like that over anyone else’s shoulders, just as Thimble hadn’t. Only at me.

And just as my family had marveled at Thimble following me around, they marveled at how Tod latched on to me. Photos of my early adolescent years now featured a toddler rather than a cat, standing or sitting some distance away, always at a distance, content to just watch me, sometimes for hours on end.

Mother made a joking comment once about how I must have had a very engaging “aura,” but we both knew she was just being a tease. I couldn’t in good faith say I was anything above ordinary, and I know for a fact I did not have this curious magnetic effect on other cats or other children I knew at the time. Just Thimble, just Tod.

I had noticed in Thimble as well that her attraction to me was hardly about me. She was primarily our mother’s cat, rescued as a near-dead kitten in a ditch outside Mother’s workplace, and as she grew up and settled in at home she didn’t give a rat’s ass about me or my brothers—but whatever it was that held her attention, it was happening just over my shoulder.

I sensed this same indifferent fascination with Tod. He was growing quieter than any of us boys, uncommonly quiet, even more so when he looked at me. He didn’t shriek with delight or call out to me in the cheerful way of children calling for attention. He merely looked and went quiet and stayed by my side, a little distance away, on the floor or in his walker or, later when he could stand on his own, stopped picture-still in the doorway or the middle of the carpet, tracking me with his eyes.

All that was familiar to me too, thanks to Thimble, but with one notable difference I could look forward to: Tod would grow up at some point, and he would be able to talk.

And unlike Thimble, he would be able to tell me what, or who—angel or devil—had lingered over my shoulder for as long as he had known me.

\* \* \*

Tod never did learn to speak the usual way. He had developed an infection that almost killed him at two years old, but though he survived, he had lost the use of his vocal cords. He learned to sign instead, and he was seven when I was showing him photos of Thimble, many of them photos featuring me as a younger boy, a little older than he was now.

We sat together at the low coffee table in the living room with family photo albums spread out before us. I was trying to keep him occupied until Nan returned from an errand to dismiss me from service, but I didn’t mind. I had been growing used to Tod’s company and even come to appreciate it. He was an easy kid, intelligent, thoughtful.

*It’s strange to see you alone here*, he signed, pointing to a photo of me when I was much younger.

I couldn’t place the age in the photo, but it was definitely from before Grandma Lisbeth came to live with us, even before Thimble. There were four boys instead of five, me being the youngest at the time.

But I wasn’t alone; it was a family photo, all the brothers side by side.

“Alone? What do you mean?” I said.

*You’re almost never alone*, Tod signed, then gestured at my more recent photos. *It’s always the both of you now.*

Both of us? Now?

I wanted to repeat my question, but it wouldn’t come out. He must have read it off my face, because he signed again: *Both of you*. This time, he pulled one of the older photo albums closer and opened it to a picture of Grandma Lisbeth when she was alive and absent from our lives.

*Grandma*, Tod signed. He pointed at the picture, then pointed at me, over my shoulder.

This time I looked around.

Still I saw nothing, but felt something different in my newfound awareness, a tightening in my chest as realization crept under my skin.

I remembered in a flash the scene at Grandma’s deathbed, the way she had snatched at my hand the moment her heart had stopped. The keen sense I had of her being trapped somehow, being helpless to release her, though her hand had not released me from the impossible request.

When little Tod pointed over my shoulder and signed *Grandma*, what I remembered most was not her eyes, or the wincing pain of her fingers clawed into my wrist, but the sound in her throat, the strange misplaced anger in it.

Had she escaped after all? Or was she still trapped here, holding on to me the way she had held on to my wrist?

Tod still stared at me, waiting for my reply. Instead of denial or doubt, I only felt the chill of understanding. I felt sick. I tried not to let it show, tried to focus on my little brother’s gentle, *living*, face to keep me anchored in the moment.

“Is she still there now?” I asked, not helping how my voice dropped as if to keep her from hearing. Despite my best efforts, my voice came out a bit shaky. “Is she always there?”

*Often*, signed Tod, *not always. She’s not here now, but she was.*

I nodded as though this was expected, but my mind was whirling, trying to catch up. I was thinking of Thimble.

*How come you don’t talk to her?* Tod asked next, taking advantage of my disorientation to press the issue about Grandma. *I notice nobody talks to her, or about her.*

“We didn’t know her too well…and we can’t hear her,” I said honestly, but was unsure what else to tell him. What could I say? We can’t see her? She isn’t even supposed to be here?

*Why not?* he asked, predictably.

“She can’t talk,” I said. “It’s like how you can’t talk, some people can’t talk. She can’t...” I had to stop myself short. I couldn’t bring myself to lie to him outright. Not when he knew things we did not. He was looking at me strangely now, disbelieving.

*I think she can talk*, he signed.

I paused. “You hear her?” I asked, and he nodded without hesitation. “Does she talk to you?”

This time he had to think about it for a moment. He shook his head, then shrugged. His uncertainty unnerved me.

*She’s trying to say something,* he signed finally. *At least I think she is. But it isn’t in words. She just makes a sound.*

I stared at him. “What do you mean? What sound?”

He hesitated. Then his hand hovered somewhere uncertainly over his neck, before lightly clasping his own throat. He was having trouble describing what he was hearing, but I understood, all too well.

That death rattle, that sound deep down in her throat, unexpectedly angry. A strangled sound.

Tod lowered his hand when he saw that I understood his meaning.

“Does she...” I paused, found my nerve, tried again. “Does she sound angry?”

Instead of answering, he glanced over my shoulder, under his eyelashes, then averted his eyes. He nodded.

*Yes. Yes, she sounds angry.*

She hadn’t escaped after all. And just like all those years ago, standing by her deathbed, she had latched on to me in her failure to escape. And just like all those years ago, I felt helpless to do anything about it.

“I’m sorry,” I whispered back to him, and I was. I was sorry he had to see that, see what I had seen on that wasted face years before—the unseeing look in Grandma’s eyes—and to keep seeing it when the rest of us were mercifully blind, mercifully deaf.

Tod wouldn’t look up at me. I had to ask: “Does she scare you?”

A frown crinkled his brow as he thought about it, wanting to give me an honest reply. He had seen her over my shoulder for as long as he had been alive; could that familiarity have dulled the sharpness in her eyes? Would he have an instinctive wariness of her?

*Not really*, he replied finally.

“Brave boy,” I said in some relief. Braver than me, anyway. His lack of fear reassured me in a roundabout way, allowing me to latch on to it and stay calm. With my guard down, I added a bit of a confession: “I always thought her eyes were a bit scary.”

*They seem like it*, Tod replied. *I would be scared too, if she looked at me like that.*

I didn’t like the implications in those words. “How *does* she look at you?” I asked.

He paused a moment before answering, as if confused by my question. *She doesn’t*, he replied. *She never looks at me. She only makes that noise—and she’s always looking at you.*

As if cued by his words, I felt the pinprick awareness of eyes at the back of my head. I dared not look around.

*Maybe if you talked to her, she wouldn’t be so angry*, Tod signed.

I leaned both elbows on the table, feeling suddenly heavy and lightheaded at the same time. Again the helplessness: What on earth could I possibly say this time, to him, to *her*? “I’m sorry you couldn’t get away, but leave me alone”? I thought again of Thimble.

Tod was signing something else, but I didn’t look up at him to read his words until I was ready to take in anymore. He got impatient and tugged at my sleeve. But I was the one who spoke first. “Do you ever see a cat around here?”

Tod frowned at me, as if I were making fun of him.

“Never mind,” I said. I decided to not let the dead interfere too much with the living, no matter that some of us had eyes to see and most didn’t.

Just before Nan came home, I made Tod promise not to talk of Grandma Lisbeth again, and though he still had many questions about her, he didn’t. The staring, however, was a habit I could never shake him out of.

\* \* \*

A few months later, I watched my little brother die. This would be the third time we would be waiting for death. It had been weeks of waiting before Grandma Lisbeth died, and days of waiting before Thimble did, but it had taken only hours for Tod, the one person of all I wanted to hold here longer.

The infection he had narrowly survived had come back, and this time it wouldn’t leave without him. His death is the blurriest in memory though it was more recent, because this time I cared. Love is half-blind, and the memory grows cloudier in time the more I obsess over it.

I remember the hospital bed; I remember his ashen face, the shadows under his eyes; the antiseptic smell of death outside of home; the insulting cheerfulness of the cartoon animals on Band-Aids hiding the IV needles disappearing into his skin.

Our parents were out, getting coffee, making phone calls, waiting for my brothers to fly in, crying on shoulders. *Hell is a waiting room*, I remember thinking. I hadn’t cried yet. We were alone in the room.

I remember holding Tod’s hand, watching his eyes flickering open at the very end. He looked at me, blankly, and then his eyes shifted over my shoulder.

My hand tightened instinctively over his. “I won’t let her hurt you,” I found myself whispering for some reason; it was a promise I didn’t know how to keep.

His eyes kept flitting between my face and over my shoulder, like Thimble’s had. I wanted to get up, scream at the air, tell her to leave us alone. But before I could, Tod raised his trembling hand—I thought to sign something to me—and waved hello, but not at me. He had always been a polite child.

I glanced around over my shoulder and then back at him, a silent question on my face. He looked at me, and signed, *She’s looking at me now.*

She had never done that before. I held his hand tighter, knowing he might be afraid. He signed, *It’s okay.* He lowered his hand and closed his eyes, too weak to continue.

He died a few minutes later. I was the last one to see him alive. This time I did not run out with the news.

\* \* \*

Every day now I see children dying, slowly or quickly, sometimes expectedly, but always tragically, when at work at the Children’s Hospital. At cancer wards and ICUs, I see Tod’s face reflected back at me a hundred times over, staring back placidly under the watch of crying strangers. Often it was only I and the dying child in the room who wouldn’t be crying.

My family couldn’t understand how I could bear to do this sort of work, but I knew I had to. It wasn’t because of how we had lost Tod (as they thought) but because I was starting to understand how to get rid of *her*.

I knew her name in life, of course, but in my day-to-day life I often thought of her as something else. The angel of death, perhaps, and by extension and under her bidding I was the deathbed angel.

That’s what some of the grateful parents called me. That was my job. I was called in to calm down frightened children and soothe their mental anguish, and nobody understood how I could, but I always did.

The more sickly ones, the ones who had narrowly escaped death at infancy like Thimble and Tod had, often glanced over my shoulder but said nothing. They always seemed to lose the fire to fight, to cry, to be alarmed at their own pain. Their souls grew old in my presence, awaiting death calmly like one who had lived five times as long and ten times as well.

Their parents never understood, and neither did the doctors, but they were glad I was around, and I breathed not a word of *her* to anyone.

Sitting by the children’s bedside toward the end of their short lives, I didn’t even have to say a word. They only had to look at me, and then at the woman over my shoulder. When her eyes turned from me to them for the first and last time, the light would fade quietly out of their eyes.

And, I hoped, the woman would come closer to being free herself, riding on the deaths of others until her own bonds were frayed and she left me.

Every so often I would volunteer at the animal shelters, helping to put down old dogs and ill cats, making sure their ends were peaceful. The dogs sometimes wagged their tails, weakly, when they looked over my shoulder, but more often they just stared, wary and resigned. The cats were more likely to act how Thimble did: the irritated flick of the tail, the twitch of the ears as they heard the noise in her throat.

How many deaths she would need me to witness on her behalf is anyone’s guess. Even outside of work, she drives me to somehow end up on the deathbeds of everyone I know. My parents, Nan, my eldest brother (when all those cigarettes had finally caught up to him), an aunt I was never close with. Somehow I would always be the last to see them alive, and it was all her doing.

I don’t think they ever saw her even before death: that was a privilege reserved for more innocent eyes, those who had always been closer to death than they were to life. And once they saw her, they couldn’t leave without her permission.

After Tod died, I never spoke of Grandma Lisbeth again. There was no need to. She had taught my father that nobody should die alone; I  learned that from him, and decided that as far as I could help it, they wouldn’t.

I still can’t hear her, of course, can’t sense her there, so for the most part I can try and continue like she isn’t.

Sometimes I find myself throwing salt over my shoulder and holding my breath; I have no idea whether that does anything. I stare into reflective surfaces at the emptiness over my own shoulder, a compulsive habit, picturing what Tod had seen before he died.

Every now and then, when I catch myself imagining I had done all I could, I still find children—always children—glancing over my shoulder outside the hospital; every now and then animals would too.

That’s my only sign that she’s still there, fading, wavering, but still trapped. Perhaps mine would be the last death she will need; perhaps that’s why she looked at me more than she looked at anyone else, as Tod gave me to believe, calling endlessly without words in her strangled, angry voice.

These innocent, knowing, dying eyes are my only sign that I still have a long way to go, endlessly searching, with her eyes at the back of my head, for those about to cross over.Back in October of last year, I applied for a job as a hotel bellboy, and the interview came with some peculiar rules. I’d been laid off in August, like many others, due to the pandemic. This opening came up in passing during a conversation at a bar.

I was camping on a college friend’s couch at twenty-two, and we’d decided to meet his girlfriend to get out of the house and have a drink with her old sorority sisters. The term outdoor and fifty percent capacity had been stretched to its limit in Hoboken. The only real change since the pandemic was that no one could sit at the bar and put less tables on the floor, meaning seating was cramped.

That’s how I met Katherine. In the commotion, my group had rushed to find seats with some friends we already knew. Katherine had been talking to my friend Jill when everyone scrambled to make room for us, and she hesitated to move during the seating shuffle. When everyone was settled, my roommate had stolen Jill away to another table, and Katherine was trapped with us. Kathrine, a pretty blond girl with big brown eyes and definitely one of Jill’s sorority sisters.

While conversation kicked up for our group, Kathrine was quiet, obviously feeling kind of awkward and excluded. I guessed she only really knew Jill, so I struck up a conversation with her to be polite. Of course, there’s a limited number of topics near strangers are comfortable having with each other at first. Inevitably, I asked her what she did for a living.

“I work at The Magnam,” she said as if I’d know what that was. 

To be fair, most of my friends who’d taken up business degrees and gotten jobs as analysts of some kind answered the question that same way. My biology major didn’t lend itself to company names. When I asked, she explained it was a luxury hotel in the city.

“I thought hotels weren’t doing so well right now,” I said.

“It’s the type of place with clients rich enough to rent out floors for six weeks,” Kathrine explained. “We kind of don’t worry about rotating traffic. Pays well. Tips are pretty good too. Biggest problem is the short staff since...you know.”

The giant unemployment elephant in the room all us young workers refused to acknowledge hovered wordlessly between us. I spent the rest of the night talking to her about hockey, latching onto the fact that she was a Devil’s fan, at least.

I didn’t really get desperate enough to consider hotel service until a month later when my already pathetic savings had dwindled to almost nothing and none of my other prospects had panned out in my field. I was staring down my last can of tuna and, though Brian hadn’t asked, I knew I should be paying rent or moving out by now. I wasn’t going to move in with my asshole dad and my mom just sold her house to pay for her own hospital expenses. Money, any money, would do. I decided to take a chance and text Katherine, hoping she wouldn’t be offended that this was the first time I was reaching out to her since we met.

I got an automatic message back that I was texting a landline. 

I half assumed then that she gave me a fake number, one off from her cell or something. Part of me found that amusing. I called it, half-expecting an automatic machine to tell me it’d connect me to the moon in the rejection system. This would be a funny little anecdote to tell Jill if that was the case, and, maybe, a little concerning for my social skills. But, no. Two rings in, Kathrine picked up.

“Hello?”

“Oh! Hi,” I said, stilted, shocked she was actually on the other side. “Kathrine? This is Katherine right?” Right about then I realized I didn’t remember her last name. “Um...from the bar the other night for Jill Delaney’s sorority sister reunion. It’s Jesse by the way.” Smooth as sandpaper.

“Yes, I remember. You alright, over there, Jesse?”

“Yeah, I just didn’t expect you to answer a landline.”

“Right,” she said sheepishly. “I forgot that. They don’t really let us use cellphones here, so I kind of fell into the habit of giving out people my work phone. Sorry. You can call me Kat, by the way.”

“Kat, ok. You’re working. I can call back, or you can call me back, or--” I heard myself making a bigger deal out of a simple question than it should be. “I had a question about your job...if you were still hiring--I mean the Magnam. Like, if it was still…hiring.” 

I was listening to myself nervously rattle off nonsense wondering why I wasn’t dropping dead from mortification yet. Somehow, after that mess, Katherine didn’t immediately hang up. She even told me she’d ask the manager about potential openings. 

I didn’t hear back anything for two days and had almost forgotten about it when my friend Brian dropped a manila envelope on my lap. It was addressed to me, though I usually had my mail forwarded to my mom’s in South Jersey. But, there it was, and when I opened it, there was a little introductory letter to me in type and textured paper.

Dear Jesse Faulks,

Your interest in joining The Magnam’s hospitable team. We have been referred your information and believe that it may fit the goals of our hotel.

We would like to extend an invitation to conduct a formal interview and further discuss your skills and qualifications in relation to further opportunities.

Please arrive at the following address at no later than 10:00am sharp on Saturday 10/10/2020.

Before your interview, please be sure to study the following rules before arriving and to come prepared.

1. If you arrive by car, you may park on the east lot in any blue space. Do not park in the white or reserved spaces, these are for guests.
2. You will enter through the eastern entrance. An eagle in the bronze filigree on the door is the correct entrance should you not notice any signs.
3. If the door is open, walk in and proceed to step 3a.
4. If the door is closed, walk around to the south-side entrance marked with a decorative woman and proceed to step 3b.
5. Please bring a printed copy of your resume.
   1. If you have arrived through the situation described in 2a hotel staff will be there to greet you. Give the blond attendant your coat and hat and other personal belongings, if you have either, and deposit any electronic devices on your person into the bin sitting on the accent table beside the mirror. 
   2. If you have arrived through the situation described in 2b you will be alone. Place your electronic devices, likewise, in a bin on the nearest accent table without a mirror in front of it. Leave your personal belongings including purses, handbags, backpacks, timekeeping devices, wallets, keys, papers, notebooks, books, pens, pencils and hats on the chair beside the table. You may proceed with your coat.
6. Proceed to room 002N on the map provided. Please take the time to memorize both routes, you shall not be permitted to speak to staff or guests under any circumstances.
   1. Do not interact with the staff or diverge from the most direct route possible.
7. When arriving, knock twice. Enter when you hear two knocks in return.
8. If you arrived in situation 2a described above, sit in the chair to the left. If you arrived in situation 2b described above, sit in the chair behind the desk of your interviewer. In the unlikely event that all chairs are filled, stand in the left hand corner. In the unlikely event that there is only one chair, stand in the left hand corner.
9. If it is only you and the interviewer, you will introduce yourself first with the following phrase: “What a swell day it is to be out yonder, lovely to meet you. I’m (your full name), here about the position.” If you entered through the situation described in 2b, however, you may introduce yourself as you please.
10. If there is anyone else in the room, you are to wait to be spoken to. If there is a woman in the room wearing green, or a man with a feather in his breast pocket, do not speak to them no matter what they say to you. If there is a man in the room with a hat, look immediately to the floor and do not look up at him for the remainder of the time he is in the room. If there is a man wearing red in the room, do not say nor confirm your full name throughout the duration of the interview. When asked to speak in this group, the phrase you will say in turn to your interviewer. “It’s a pleasure to meet you as well, I am excited for this opportunity to become a part of the Grand’s illustrious team.”
11. The interview will be conducted at this time, answer honestly all questions, barring the caveats mentioned above.
12. You are not to leave the room until dismissed.
13. Upon leaving, you will wait for any women in the room to stand and exit first. Do be sure to stand if they rise from their seats, and return to your seat when finished. If the man with a feather in his breast pocket is in the room, you will wait for him to dismiss you before leaving.
14. When exiting, you will leave through the east-side entrance.
15. Discuss this list with no one.

We are excited to meet you. Call with any questions or clarifications.

The Magnam

I looked at the rules and flipped to the other pages in this packet to see a map of the parking and first floor, contact information, clothing requirements, and an old-fashioned brochure listing benefits, responsibilities, and average salary of a bellboy--all of which were far too good for what I expected to be a minimum wage experience.

“I think I’m being pranked,” I told Brian, letting him read over the rules. Brian laughed and told me to toss it in the garbage or just frame it.

It was garbage, yeah, but I knew the only person who would have tailor-made this garbage for me. I was flattered, really. This was pretty elaborate, and I’ll admit very detailed, down to the weathered look of the floor map. I went to text Kat then remembered I still had to ask for her cell. I called the landline to say thanks for the prank gift.

“I didn’t send you anything,” Kat said, sounding genuinely surprised.

“I thought it was funny, Kat. The rules list is kind of just dramatic, don’t you think?”

“Rules?” Kat sounded confused over the phone and then laughed. “Oh, right! I forgot how weird they are when you start this job.”

“What?”

“I didn’t send you anything,” Kat said again. “All I did was mention you to my manager. Lied a bit and said you had some experience in hospitality--it’s not like this job is demanding. He asked for your name and address and I know you live with Jill’s boyfriend so...easy enough. Your name is Jesse Faulks right?”

“Yeah.”

“He sent you a package, right? Lots of weird rules?”

“If it is only you and the interviewer, you will introduce yourself first with the following phrase: ‘What a swell day it is to be out yonder,’” I read dramatically

“Yep,” Kat said, laughing a little. “You are actually supposed to follow them.”

“Seriously? I’m not going to remember all this trash,” I said. “Not without a checklist or something.”

“Hold on.”

Kat hung up and she didn’t call back in a few minutes. She didn’t call back until the next day.

“Hey, Jesse!” Kat said. “So, I asked around and I was right. You don’t have to worry, it’s always the same. The rules are overcomplicated. If you want I can go over them with you, but, essentially, you’re supposed to follow the 2b. rule set.”

“That’s it?” 

“Yeah.”

I felt the biggest weigh lift off my chest then, thinking of having an income again. If these people wanted me to sing and tap dance, I’d learn the choreography, fine. At the end of the day, I’d have the job and it’s easier to hire someone than fire them. If this was all just a complicated hazing, fine. I asked Kat exactly what lines I had to know for my playact of an interview. She started listing them off casually, but then sort of petered off.

“If you don’t think you’ll have it by Saturday,” Kat said, a little hesitantly, “I can come over and help you go over it.”

I grimaced. She was inviting herself over. Kat seemed sweet and I wanted to think of it as a kind gesture, but this felt a little too above and beyond. I held the phone to my chest, panicking, looking for Brian to hiss my concerns at, but he was off at the gym. *Suggest somewhere public*, I thought to myself.

“Uh...how about we talk it over at, like, the park instead? Tomorrow? When do you get off work?”

“I’m off at six, tomorrow, actually.”

It’d be dark by then. “There’s a coffee house nearby. We could meet at the green.”

She agreed and I hung up feeling pretty good about relocating it to somewhere impersonal. Brian laughed at me and I realized I probably made it sound more like a date. Shit. 

The not-date review of the rules was actually not as bad as I thought it would be. Kat seemed truly eager to get down to business reviewing what to do and when. She kept the list in her hand and made me recite each step. We ignored all the caveats and kept to the bare necessities of the path she and the other employees went through.

“And after you leave your stuff in the bin--”

“--but the jacket I can take,” I chime in.

“When you get inside the room and sit in the back chair, you’ll say…”

“It’s a pleasure to meet you as well, I am excited for this opportunity to become a part of the Grand’s illustrious-bullshit-team.”

Katherine smiled wide, observing me with wide brown eyes. “You’re hired,” she teased.

I felt pretty alright about Saturday. The attire required was another hurdle, but not as bad as the others. Black pants, black shirt with a collar, black shoes, red tie. I had some slacks from my graduation and borrowed the shirt from Brian. Jill and I found a tie for a buck at a thrift store.

I took the subway into the city and made it to The Magnam at sometime around 9:50. As Kat had promised, the east entrance was closed, which meant I was going around to the south entrance. The building itself looked like any other hotel I’d seen in the city, tall, stone structures with filigree and crests that added some extra air of importance to the structure’s existence. To add to that, it was right across from the park, but only four blocks from a Chipotle. Nothing in the city is above being neighbors with convenient fast food.

Before I even got inside, however, everything kind of quickly went sideways. The east-side entrance was closed as it was supposed to be, and I hardly even looked at it before walking over to the south-side. But, then the south-side door was closed. It was the south-side door. The filigree was of a woman and it was the door I was supposed to walk through. But, I pulled on the handle, knocked, and waited. No one came, and I rushed immediately back to the east-side door, half-dreading that it was the open one. If that was the case, I was screwed. I only knew the rules for the B scenarios. But, when I tried that door, it was just as locked as the other.

“The hell…” I walked around the street looking for another entrance, but couldn’t find one. It was soon 10: 05 and I was wondering if something had gone wrong. So, I did the only thing I could think of and called Kat. She answered quickly enough.

“What do you mean the door’s closed?” Kat snapped.

“It’s Saturday, isn’t it?”

“Yeah, it is. You’re supposed to be here, I saw it on Robert’s schedule. He...Hold on, I’m coming down, just go to the east side of the building and walk past the door and to the alley. There’s an employee entrance there, I can let you in. Just wait there!”

She hung up on me and I practically sprinted back around the wide building. The alley she was talking about was the odd backing to an otherwise opulent building. The walls were flat, the dumpsters crowding both sides and half-open, reeking with garbage. Even in the middle of morning, it was dark in that little crack of space.

The door Kat mentioned was a bland, gray door that looked severe and functional, completely detached from the gaudy facade that decorated the front. I paced up and down the chipped asphalt, dodging the glass chips and piles of crates. Then, the white door opened, and I turned at attention.

But, it wasn’t Kat at the door.

“What are you doing back here, kid? You lost?” a man asked. He wore a trim red and black uniform and a little name tag that said *Eddie.*

Instinctively, I would have answered “no” and babbled about being here for an interview, but I knew I wasn’t supposed to be back here. This was off the interview’s script and if this was my only entrance, I couldn’t be shooed away from it.

“I’m the new guy. J--Rob told me to come in this way today,” I said, boldly plucking the name I heard Kat use. “But I...I….” I made an awkward gesture toward the door, trying to convey going through and hoping vague complications seemed like an understandable enough thing for him to understand.

“Oh,” he said, seeming to think my uncertainty was warranted. His thin lips pressed together tight and he gave me an odd kind of look. He may have wanted to say something, but instead quickly shouldered a large garbage bag that’d been laid at his feet behind him and held the door open for me. “Go on then. He’s got an interview or something today, so you can wait for him in the break room. 15E.”

I took the door from him and held it open in turn so he could take the garbage. “Thanks.”

Eddie nodded. His bag was dripping garbage slime, which is never pleasant, but he didn’t seem bothered to have it hauled over his shoulder. When he walked it past me, there wasn’t the lingering smell of garbage, but there was something like iron. He walked on, and I walked into the hotel, the door closing behind me. I looked down at the polished floor, and there were stains when the garbage bag had been. They were a little ruddy red-brown, like the kind you’d see on a counter or a cutting board after cutting up a steak.

*Expired meat*, I thought to myself. I realized Eddie wouldn’t take long to throw out the trash and I had to be out of sight by the time he arrived to not get caught. I sprinted down the hall, through a few sets of double doors, heading *inward* to the best of my approximation, hoping to hit a lobby or room numbers to guide my way. Soon enough, the tile floor turned to green carpet, and the ornate facade was back as I walked into the main rooms.

I looked at the first door beside me. 025E. It wasn’t where I was supposed to be, but it gave me an idea of where to go. Kat showed me a direct route on the map, so I knew I had to walk to the North Wing first, which meant following E’s numbers until they dwindled to 1 near the lobby, and then continuing on the way I would have if I entered through the southern entrance. I still had my coat and my phone, but this wasn’t unmanageable. I could fake it.

First thing first, I had to get rid of my stuff. The hall was ornate, decorated with slim wooden tables and delicate golden electric lighting. There were pieces of ivory, jade and copper art that looked expensive. I quickly removed my coat and my phone by 011E and kind of bundled both up and shoved it in a nice, wide porcelain vase. I wasn’t about to lose a stupid interview over a technicality.

I continued on, half-afraid I was already lost until I hit the first wall with a copper bust of some 1800s guy. Kat had mentioned it before. I was in the hall directly behind the lobby and standing directly behind the concierge desk now. All I had to do from here is turn left--or I would have if I was coming from the south-side. Now, I just had to keep walking and I’d be there. I’d keep going, turning right at the women’s restroom, and then 002N was on the right. 

As I got to the bust, two chatting women, dressed as staff, rounded the corner and spotted me. When they did, they went dead silent. They didn’t slow down, but they stared, jaws falling a little slack at the sight of me. I tried to smile back, but they ducked their heads away and kept walking. One of the girls dropped something. It was heavy enough that they should have been able to hear the dull thud, but they rounded the corner instead of stopping.

It was a key. I picked it up and it was clearly an old-fashioned room key, not a card for an electric door, but a heavy brass key with a little tag that said 001. I backtracked a little, trying to catch their attention. They’d huddled closer together, walking arm and arm, whispering and giggling to one another. One threw her head back to sneak a glance at the empty hall and looked genuinely surprised to see me. I held the key up, showing her wordlessly what she left. She nodded and tossed her head to the side as if saying, *get going.*

“But--”

She raised her hand to her lips and turned her back to me, breaking into a run arm-in-arm with her friend. I turned the key over in my hands. This was the part of the hall I was supposed to walk into. The instructions said I wasn’t supposed to talk to staff. Maybe she knew that. Maybe she was one of Kat’s friends and was helping me out. Should I have left the key on the ground? Was this a part of this weird hazing? I half debated just leaving it on the floor, but it was in my hand anyway. I’d turn it into the guy at my interview and tell him what happened. Maybe that was the point of it.

Finally, I found room 002N was where Kat said it’d be, the second to last door in a dead-end hall. The last door, 001, was propped open, slightly ajar. It was open just a crack, but the lights were off, giving me only a glimpse of the carpet. I knocked twice like I was supposed to.

“Come in!” I heard from the other side of the door.

I remained outside, at ease, knowing what Kat and I had rehearsed.

“Hey! I said come in!” the guy on the other side called a little louder.

I shifted a little, debating if I should knock again. No. Two knocks. Kat had even wrapped her knuckles against the table when we went over it. I was supposed to wait for two knocks.

As I waited, I heard another noise just behind me, from 001. The door squeaked on its hinges. When I turned, it was a little more open, but I still couldn’t see much inside from my angle. I could hear something inside, though. Someone was moving around, scratching against the wall just across from me. I heard a voice like an old man’s moan weakly. 

“Help,” he said, his voice sorrowful and cracked. “Somebody. Help.”

I don’t know what made me weary. Maybe it was something in the voice, desperate and gravelly, yes, but a little too clear, like it knew I was there to hear it. Some instinctive part of me told me to stay put. Then, the groaning stopped and there was a heavy thud, like a fist pounding the wall. I heard the man inside groan and shuffle again, slowly making its way down the length of the room, closer to the door.

I knocked again at 002N. “Hey! Hey, there’s someone here!” I called only to be met with no response. The groaning crept closer to the door.

“Help! Je...Jesss….Help!”

I rushed to door 001, grabbed the handle and slammed it shut. I didn’t look inside, but I caught a waft of the *smell*. The pungent stench of a sewer on a rainy day came to mind, like something had died and rotted inside. Then, a hand reached out and grabbed my wrist and tugged. I was thrown back against the opposite side of the hall and there was Kat, pulling the door closed. Room 001 shook as the thing on the opposite side threw its full weight against the door. 

Kat turned and looked at me, holding her hand out. “The key!” she hissed. “The key!”

My hands were shaking as I fished into my pocket for the brass key. I hardly had it out of my pocket when Kat snatched it away and locked the door. Another powerful bang sent her stumbling back to the opposite side of the hall.

It was then I heard two calm, controlled knocks behind me. I nearly jumped back to the *other* side before suddenly remembering this was 002N and I was waiting on them. I looked to Kat, who paused, midway through fixing her blouse. Kat pulled me onto my feet and fixed my tie. 

“Don’t worry about that,” Kat whispered hastily. “Tell them you locked the door with no one’s help. I wasn’t here. Go.”

I practically threw the door open and sprinted in.

Three members of the hotel staff sat inside, all very composed, and evidently confused by my heavy breathing and my no-doubt, priceless expression. 

“What’s the matter, Love? You look absolutely shaken!” the woman behind the desk asked.

“A--” I immediately shut my mouth, taking in exactly who was in the room and where.

There were three people like Kat had warned me, but they weren’t...they were more distracting than I expected. Kat told me to expect there to be a man in a red vest, and I did since I’d stumbled into his chair. What I didn’t expect was for him to be badly burned. A nasty, pinkish scar ran up his neck, shriveling his chin, his ear and his nostrils. One eye was permanently shut and the other was crooked.

The other was a woman who stood in the corner. She loomed over the chair next to the man in red, her sunken eyes fixed intesley on me. There’s no other word to describe her other than intense. I felt like I was under scrutiny for how I moved and how loud my steps were as I passed her. She was very tall, so tall she had developed a hunch from years of bending her neck to look down at people. She said nothing to me, but her head turned, tracking me as I went.

The last was the woman in green I wasn’t supposed to speak to, and she was sharply dressed and quite pretty, but was also the one sitting behind the desk where I expected my interviewer to be. I wasn’t supposed to speak to her, wasn’t I? That was the whole point Kat had drilled into my head. The one I wasn’t supposed to worry about was the looming woman who twitched when I took my seat in the chair behind the desk.

“Could I get you a glass of water, love?” the woman in green asked sweetly. “You’re our 10 o’clock, aren’t you? Jesse Faulks?”

I wasn’t allowed to speak to her, wasn’t I? Did that include nodding? 

“He’s skinny,” the tall one said, buggy eyes still set on me. Her pale tongue darted out to lick her lips. “Sticks.”

“Behave, Lorie,” the man told the tall woman. “Jesse, this is Lorie Bellaford, honorary front office manager,” he said, nodding to the tall woman. He then gestured to the woman in green. “Frederika Sardie, the general manager of this hotel, and I’m Robert Strauss, chief concierge and hiring manager. You can tell us a little about yourself.”

“I...uh...I…. It’s a p-pleasure to meet you as well, I am excited for this opportunity to become a part of the Grand’s...” I couldn’t remember the stupid word used between this part.

“Illustrious team,” Frederika supplied. “Close enough, I’d say.”

The three of them chuckled a little. I looked at Robert. “I...there’s something in room one that--”

Robert held up a hand. “We’ll get to that.”

“...Kay.”

“Did you have any trouble finding the entrance?” Robert asked.

“No.”    

“No?”

“I uh...Someone walked out when I walked in.”

“At which entrance?”

“The east one.”

“Why’d you lie?”

“I...I didn’t have any trouble finding the entrance.”

“Do you know what was in the bag?” Lorie asked, her voice pitched high and eager. 

“What bag?” Robert asked, looking confused.

“The bag Eddie had,” Lorie said.

I shook my head, too terrified by her gaze to really reply to her.

Robert arched a brow. “You saw Eddie? The janitor.”

“For a second,” I said hesitantly.

Robert and Frederika shared a look, but Frederika smiled. “It is an *east-side* entrance.”

Robert cleared his throat and moved on. “Then you saw two girls drop a key to room one. Why’d you keep it?”

“I...I wasn’t going to keep it. I was going to give it to you when I came in, but then--”

“--Room 1,” the woman in green supplied.

I almost answered in the affirmative and then stopped myself. She smiled wide, amused to nearly catch me.

“What’d you do?” Robert asked.

“I...I closed the door and locked it.”

“That’s it?”

“Yeah.”

“Why didn’t you go into the room to see who was calling?” he asked.

“I had a bad feeling.”

“And you weren’t tempted to look? Walk in, just see?” Robert asked.

“That was a test, wasn’t it?” I asked. “Are people supposed to look?”

“If they don’t want to be here,” Lorie said with that wrinkled, over-eager grin.

“Does she upset you?” Frederika asked me suddenly with a wicked grin. As she did, Lorie’s wrinkled face curled into a frown and her eyes were still menacing facing me. I wanted to protest, but I’m not supposed to speak to her, and then I started weighing how much I cared about the rules in a place already as twisted as this. “She does, doesn’t she?” Frederika taunted. “Hear that, Lorie? He thinks you’re disgusting.”

Lorie stomped forward and suddenly was looming over me, and I had nowhere to go but the back of my chair as buggy eyes glared further and further down at me. Then, Robert cleared his throat. “That’ll be enough. Thank you.”

Lorie and Frederika stood and I stood as well as they both made their exits. I looked to Robert then. “What kind of place is this?”

“One that requires discretion, a good sense of memorization and improvisation. I think you’ll be a good fit here,” Robert said, standing and walking over to the desk. He unlocked a cabinet drawer and pulled out some papers. He then drew a handkerchief and reached up, pulling up a piece of the skin at the top of his forehead. I nearly leapt up out of my seat as he started peeling the skin back.

“Holy--”

Robert kept pulling until half his face was removed, and there was no fleshy muscle beneath, just a regular half of a face. It was makeup. Burn makeup. “Excuse me a moment. The prosthetics itch, but I’d like to make you an offer to sign on with us.”

“It was all makeup?” I snap.

“Part of the interview. The bag Eddie carried was meant to be suspicious and Joe gets a kick out of scaring the new guys in room one. See, like I said, this is a job that’s unpredictable, and we look for a certain personality type. We try to learn it as quickly as possible.” Robert wiped off the rest of the makeup with his handkerchief and looked like a normal man in his mid-forties. “Most people break with Lorie or forget the rules with Freddie.”

I looked dumbfounded from the door to him. “That’s it? That’s the interview?”

“Yes.”

“Don’t you want to ask me questions?”

“I’ve learned about everything I need to know from you. The fact that you were able to find us and send a letter of inquiry to us at all is a start to let me know you know what kind of place this is. Following the rules and your reaction to our surprises for you tells me everything else I need to know.”

“What kind of place do you work that you need me to know how I’d react to a bloody bag and a guy moaning from another room?”

Robert straightened and smiled as if that was a question with the most obvious answer. “We’re a luxury hotel. Half our job is going about as if it’s business as usual, but it’s not. There’s a lot of protocol to follow and it requires you to know what to do in a lot of situations. Did you have anyone help you with the rules?”

“No,” I say as I rehearsed. “I wasn’t supposed to show them to anyone else. Also an extreme part of this test?”

“Good,” Robert said. “If you can’t memorize and follow those instructions in the time we gave you, then you wouldn’t be able to handle this job. But you were a natural, but you still have enough independent thought that you’re not completely lacking in critical thought. You’ll do well here.”

“Listen, after all of this, I don’t even know if I want this job.”

Robert didn’t say anything, just showed me the starting salary. “This was the walk through fire. But, I can guarantee, if you sign on with us, so long as you stick to the rules, you’ll be fine.”

The first set of rules wasn’t so bad. This was all an act, and if this was some weird idea of promoting discretion, then fine. Joe and Eddie were a set up. I could keep my mouth shut. If they’d let me in and all I had to do was learn a routine, fine. So, I took the job. It was better than anything I’d get in a lab, and in that moment things had gone from terrifying to completely lax. I signed a contract there and went home with a set of rules, a schedule and a signing bonus.

I was giddy all the way home, waving my check in Brian’s face. Jill came by later and I wholeheartedly thanked her too. “Jill, I’m so glad you keep good friends,” I said as I tore into the new rules list.

“What do you mean?”

“Katherine.”

“Who?”

“Katherine….” I still couldn’t remember her last name. “Jill, your sorority sister. You were sitting with her at your reunion before we arrived.”

“Oh,” Jill nodded.

I turned back to my employee contract and pulled out the new list of rules, flipping to the first page. “You mean that blond girl?” Jill asked. “I only met her that night. I thought she was a friend of yours.”

Rule 1: Never speak to Katherine. Never give her your name.

Well..shit.  

It started as a normal Monday morning for me. I was sitting in my cell, laying in my bed, repeatedly throwing my folded up socks in the air and catching them, thinking about the poor life choices I made, how I left my little brother alone, what I would do once I get out, how I would better myself. I was convicted of robbery five years ago, and I still had three more to spend in this cold, grey, fetid shithole. I felt like I was forced to do it, how else could I provide for my little brother? Ever since our mother passed away, we were constantly fighting for our survival. Our father was never in our lives to begin with.

As I was pondering about my best options, what I could do to turn everything around once and for all, I heard the door opening. In came three guards, asking me to follow them. They led me to a room, somewhere on the other side of this huge complex. I stepped into a dim lit room and was greeted by two men in lab coats, who at the same time wore pastor collars and huge crosses over their necks. “What the hell is going on here?” I asked, looking around confused about all this strange machinery in the room. “Well Mr. Evans, I am going to be direct with you. We are currently working on understanding the afterlife, and we are inviting you to be our first test subject.” One of the men told me. I was a little bewildered, but also intrigued and asked them to go on. “We will inject you with a deadly toxin and revive you 5 minutes later. And since you are a convicted criminal, we expect you will end up in… hell.” My confusion grew into anger and disbelief, but at the same time, I never believed in religion anyway, so I didn’t have to fear anything, right? They promised me freedom and money if I’d make it back and even more money for my remaining relatives if I wouldn’t. That’s when I started thinking about my brother, how this was my chance to make up for all the things I did wrong in the past. He deserved a better life, our mother raised him so well. In fact, he got all the benevolent characteristics from her. I don’t know how I wound up as such a mess.

So I agreed, and they laid me down on this medical bed. As they injected me with the toxin, I could feel my soul drifting away. It was a cozy, warm feeling. Looking at the scientist, I blinked, and when I opened my eyes again, I found myself in a dark void, fully aware of the situation. I couldn’t believe it, I was actually dead and in the afterlife. “This doesn’t look much like hell though. Shouldn’t there be, like, a lot of fire and flowing lava or something?” I thought to myself. That’s when I heard someone screaming in the distance. I ran over to investigate and I completely froze. It was David, a former friend of mine. He was chained up, being repeatedly dipped into boiling water. His screams became fainter and fainter and his face more melted every time he was raised out of the water. He stole a car and died in a crash when he was fleeing from police. “Is this what my fate is? He just stole a car and I robbed a jewelry store and threatened the employee with a gun. If he got this punishment, what will be mine?” But then I saw what was dipping him into the water. Those… creatures, they don’t look anything like the demons depicted in our paintings. They have this constant smile, like it’s carved into their face, but also a look of pain in the eyes. Their bodies are white and leathery, with a hunched walk. They danced around the pool in a circle, and the sound they made, oh god, the sound… At this point I was just waiting for the 5 minutes to be over, promising myself to do everything to save myself from this place.

Then I heard someone calling for me, I turned around. It was my mother, strung up on a pole, these things narrowing in on her with axes and torches. I began screaming at the top of my lungs. “Back the fuck up! Leave her alone! She doesn’t belong in hell!” I shouted desperately, with tears going down my face. I started running at these creatures, knowing damn well I had no chance to hold them off. One of them quickly turned around and jumped at me, holding me to the ground.

“Oh, there is no hell… And there is no heaven either. This is where everyone goes when they die.” It said with its low vibrating voice, smiling at me inches from my face. As it raised its axe to swing down on me, I was revived.

I woke up, unable to move, but wanting to scream and smash everything to pieces. “What did you see?” the men in the coats asked me. As I slowly gained my ability to move, I realized there was no way they’d let me free if I told them the truth, no one should ever find out about this. “Nothing, I didn’t even realize I was dead.” I responded, fighting back the urge to cry. “How disappointing... but thank you for your cooperation, and as promised, you will be out by tomorrow.” The man told me.

I called my brother as soon as I stepped out of prison, I told him how I got out, but now what I saw, I don’t want to crush all hopes and dreams of this boy. With the money I got I bought a house for us two, he applied to a college last week, life is going great and sometimes I even forget about the horrors that await me. But every time I do something where I have a small chance of dying, every time I cross the street, every time I drive my car, I hear them calling my name. They are waiting for me. They are waiting for all of us.Sleeping in my bed always used to make me itchy. It was an annoyingly predictable cycle. I would fall asleep with an odd, tickling sensation on my skin, one that would vanish when I rubbed at the spot. And when I woke up, my arms and legs would be crazy itchy, almost burning.

I once sat in the bathroom for almost thirty minutes, looking over my skin with a hand mirror, my butt slowly going numb, obsessively examining every spot. But there was nothing I could pinpoint.

My dad scoffed at my problem. He was frustratingly skeptical of just about everything, and every time I complained to him, he would shrug it off and suggest another fruitless solution I had already tried. Truth be told, I think he just hated hearing anything bad about the house. It was been in his family for generations, and he was always reticent to change anything about it.

I sometimes wondered if my bed had been in the family for generations too. It creaked if you so much as looked at it, and had all sorts of lumpy spots. And it smelled permanently musty, no matter how much air freshener I hosed it down with or how many times I washed the sheets. It rubbed off onto my skin, oozed into my pores. My friends always joked that I smelled like their grandparents’ houses.

At first I thought it might just be something weird with my skin. But then one time, my cousins came to visit. One got my bed and I was banished to the couch. At first I was upset, but that visit was the first time I could remember that my skin didn’t itch when I woke up. The morning that my cousins were leaving, I approached the one that had slept in my bed.

“Hey, did you sleep alright in my room?”

“Yeah,” she said, “I slept fine.”

“And no weird… reactions?”

She cocked her head. “Now that I think about it, I always woke up really itchy.”

“Oh?”

“Yeah…” She brushed a hand over her bare arm. “It felt like something was… tickling me just as I was falling asleep. Once, I turned on the lights, and checked the bed, but I didn’t see anything. Well, probably nothing.”

“Probably?”

“Yeah. I mean, I might have…” She trailed off, then shook her head. “No, nothing.”

So it was the bed. It was the damned bed. I begged my dad to replace it, but he always refused.  

“Why replace a perfectly good bed?” he’d ask me.

So I slathered my skin in anti-itch cream, tried not to scratch myself raw, and got on with my life.

One day though, I had had enough. When my parents weren’t home, I attempted to break the bed. I jumped up and down on it as high as I could, feeling like a giant five year old, sure that my dad would have to replace a broken bed.

But as I stopped and rested for a moment, a sharp pain shot into my foot, like a needle jamming into my leg. I cried out and fell onto the bed, clutching my foot. The spot was bleeding lightly. I must have jammed a box spring into my leg or something. I looked down at the spot I had jumped on.

It wasn’t hard to spot. There was a small splotch of blood there, and I could see the spring sticking up, a little black speck. I lightly touched the spot, wondering if I could push it back down.

Then it moved. Beneath my finger, it slid back under the surface without any pressure on my part. I thought I might have felt the skittering movement of... something, like a sea creature returning to the depths.

I scrambled back and reexamined the spot. Nothing. Just my blood now. I swallowed hard and tried to rationalize. The spring must have just… sprung back into shape, right? Yeah, that sounded realistic.

My foot had already stopped bleeding. I decided I was done with this endeavor, and left the room, unable to stop my skin from crawling.

That night the tingling was worst that before. I tossed and turned, certain I had angered the spirit of this accursed bed. And then the pain began. This was nothing like before. It was like pins were stabbing me all over my body. I flung my blanket aside and leaped up, fleeing down the stairs and waking my parents. And when my dad flipped on the lights, demanding to know what was happening, I saw it.

My skin was covered in strange, black smears, and painful bumps. I tried to talk, but all I could do was cry, my skin burned so bad. Even my father could not think of a good way to explain this. I ended up in the shower for ages, trying to cool my angry skin with icy water.

The one good thing to come out of this incident was that I was finally getting a new mattress. My parents took me to buy one the very next morning. I was elated. It was dead simple, my dad picked one out, we strapped it to the roof of the car, and drove home.

I helped haul it up to my room, squeezing it through the narrow door. I glared down the horrible old mattress that had tormented me for so long and scratched idly at the bumps still on my skin.

“Alright,” my dad said, clapping his hands together, “Let’s get moving!” We heaved the mattress out of the bed frame and it hit the ground upside down with a thump. I could see that the bottom had a sheet of gauze covering it, the staples holding it in place rusted almost to nothingness.

To this day, I have no idea what possessed me to do this. Maybe, looking down at the bed, seemingly defeated, I wanted to see what had allowed it to torment me for so long. Maybe it was a childish instinct to harm it in some way. But I reached down and tugged at the gauze.

It came away easily. And at first, I did not quite understand what my eyes were seeing. The inside was coated in a fuzzy black and white substance. Mold, I thought, of course it was mold. But then the mass moved and I realized in horror what it really was.

Spiders. Hundreds and hundreds of huge pitch black spiders and their fuzzy white egg sacs. They began to swarm out of the old mattress like flies deserting a rotting corpse.

I screamed and leaped onto the side table. But it was no use. They crawled onto my bare legs, biting and biting, and I desperately tried to shake them off.

My dad tried to stomp on them, but there were just too many. They coated the floor almost as thick as carpet. Finally, he sprang across the room and hefted me over his shoulder. He stampeded down the stairs, ran out the back, and leapt into the pool, mercifully ending their attack.

As we surfaced, I could see them floating on the surface of the water, either curled up and twitching in their death spasms, or skittering away on the surface to elsewhere.

We called an exterminator, insisting they had to come that day. The whole house was fumigated while we stayed in a hotel and I tried not to twitch in my bed, desperately trying to reassure myself that I was just imagining tiny legs tickling my skin.

Before the exterminators left for good, I asked if they had ever seen anything like this before.

“Once,” one said, scratching at his salt and pepper stubble. “Not as bad as this, but I’ve seen it.”

“Really?”

“Yeah. Another old box spring.” He chuckled. “Makes you wonder what’s really under people’s beds.”

Makes you wonder indeed.It all started about a month ago, after I’d moved into my new rental house. I was in my living room, reclining on my thrift-store couch while surfing the web. I happened to glance at the floor for a split second and saw it: a small bulge in the center of the living room rug, about the size of an apple.

The rug was an ugly thing; a circular wool affair about ten feet in diameter and a deep yellow in color. And I don’t mean a happy shade like sunshine or lemon; this was a festering, noxious, putrid yellow. The kind of yellow you’d see in the pus that forms around a grievous open wound, or in a stagnant puddle of piss in an unflushed gas station bathroom. I don’t know how anyone could’ve looked at that thing and thought: “Yes, I want this rug in my home.” The only reason I’d kept it was because it was one of the few furnishings the house had come with, and I needed *something* to cover the scuffed wood panelling of the living room floor.

Frowning, I got up and pressed the bulge down, feeling my toes hit the floor underneath. I ran my foot across the rug, the wool fibers brushing the sole of my foot as I searched for anything that might have caused the bulge. Nothing.

“Must’ve been an air pocket,” I said to myself.

Shrugging, I plopped down on the couch and went back to what I was doing. Before long I’d completely forgotten about the bulge.

\-----

Two weeks passed and it happened again.

I had just gotten home from a gruelling shift at work and was in the process of hanging up my coat when I saw it. The bulge was back, in the exact same spot as before. Only now it was the size of a grapefruit.

Frowning, I walked over to the rug and pressed my heel against the bulge. As it sank down, I felt something shift beneath my foot, accompanied by a brief sound like a wet gurgle.

I jumped back with a start. I stood there for a good minute staring at the now-flat rug, feeling my heart hammer in my ears.

Finally, I knelt down and lifted the rug.

Only the hardwood floor greeted me. I felt around for any kind of hole or hidden door or anything that could account for whatever created the bulge.

Nothing.

It was just another air pocket, I told myself as I put the rug back. Just an air pocket, that’s all. And that gurgle I heard was probably just something in the pipes that ran under the house.

Yeah, that was it.

Satisfied with my explanation, I fixed myself dinner and went to bed. As I lay there in the dark waiting to drift off to sleep, I tried to ignore the faint gurgling coming from my living room.

\-----

I stayed out of the living room from then on out, only passing through when I got home from work, or when I needed to get from my bedroom to the kitchen. Each time I walked through I kept my eyes on the rug, watching for the bulge and listening for a gurgle. When two weeks passed without incident, I felt my anxiety slowly draining away.

Then one morning, I awoke from a restless slumber. As I walked out of the hallway into the living room I stopped dead in my tracks, feeling my blood turn to ice.

The bulge was back. This time it was the size of a large dog, so big that it threatened to tip over the couch that sat on the edge of the rug. From beneath I heard that distinctive gurgling sound.

I didn’t dare move. I stood motionless for several minutes, paralyzed by dread. The rational part of my brain tried telling me I *had* to be imagining this, but it was drowned out by my primal instincts screaming at me to run.

“What *are* you?” I finally whispered.

The bulge shifted in my direction.

I screamed as I turned on my heels and bolted back to my bedroom. I slammed the door shut behind me and pushed my bed up against it. I sat down with my back against the wall and my head in my hands. My heart hammered in my ribcage as I took several deep breaths, desperately trying to rationalize what was happening.

“I’m crazy,” I said to myself. I found myself nodding frantically. Yeah, that had to be it. Clearly I’d suffered some sort of psychotic breakdown and was hallucinating that there was some kind of horrible monster under my living room rug.

It was the only explanation that made sense. But how could I convince myself that I was just imagining things? Because going out and lifting up the rug myself was out of the question. My shattered mind would surely conjure up another hallucination.

No, what I needed was a third party. Someone to confirm the bulge wasn’t really there, that it was just a product of my delirious mind.

Whipping out my phone, I sent a text to my landlord Martin.

*Hey man, got a problem. Pipes are backed up and the toilet is overflowing.*

The reply came a few minutes later: *Well shit. Hang on I’ll be right there.*

Satisfied, I put the phone away and leaned back against the wall to wait, ignoring that horrid gurgling from down the hall.

Ten minutes later I heard the sound of a car pulling into my driveway. I pushed my bed aside and crept out into the hall, staying low to the ground. Peeking around the corner into the living room, I saw the bulge under my carpet was still there, waiting. That damned gurgling assaulted my ears.

The handle of my front door jiggled as my landlord let himself in. Martin was a portly man in his fifties with a mop of greasy black hair and a thick caterpillar mustache. A tool belt hung off his waist as he stepped over the threshold.

This was it. Martin would clearly see there was no bugle, that it was all in my head. I’d probably have to see a doctor right away, get professional help. Maybe even spend time in an institution? I’d worry about that later, though. Right now I needed to see Martin walk right past the rug like the bulge wasn’t even there.

Which it wasn’t. Obviously.

“All right, I’m here,” Martin called as he shut the door behind him. “Where are…”

His voice trailed off. I felt my heart sink as his eyes settled directly on the rug, on the bulge.

The gurgling sound came again, making me flinch. Martin clearly heard it too, from the way his brow furrowed in confusion.

He saw it. He heard it.

“What the hell?” He muttered as he approached the rug. “That you under there, kid? This some kind of prank? ‘Cause I don’t get it.”

The bulge shifted slightly towards him.

I wanted to jump out, scream at him to get away. But again I found myself paralyzed by fear.

Frowning, Martin dropped to one knee, kneeling close to the floor as he lifted the edge of the rug.

For a split second, I saw his face change. Confusion was replaced by stark terror.

Then he was yanked under the rug, vanishing beneath the diseased yellow. Martin screamed, a primal sound of horror and pain, his legs flailing wildly as he was pulled under. Gurgling filled the air, and Martin’s scream was abruptly cut off by a new sound, a horrible cacophony of violent crunching and wet ripping.

And just as quickly as it started, it was over. The living room was silent as a grave, the rug laying flat on the floor.

I stood up slowly, pulse racing and body coated in sweat. I forced myself to step around the couch and kneel beside the rug. My hands were shaking as my fingers gripped the edge of the rug, whipping it up in one swift motion.

Just a normal floor. No trace of a monster, nor of Martin.

Just a floor.

I numbly set the carpet back down and returned to my room, locking the door behind me.

From behind me, I heard a brief gurgle.

\-----

That was a day ago.

I haven’t slept, haven’t eaten. As I type up this account on my phone with trembling hands, my bloodshot eyes keep wandering to the missed call notifications.

Calls from work, probably wondering why I haven’t shown up.

Calls from Martin’s wife, no doubt wondering where he is.

I’ve only set foot outside my room once, to quickly use the bathroom when the pressure of holding it in became too much. As I bolted back to the bedroom, I stole a quick glance down the hall.

There’s an enormous shadow on the living room wall, the size of a car.

Gurgling fills the air.

The thing under the rug is back.“Right,” I said, raising my voice on deck to make sure I could be heard. There were four of us, me up front and three others lounging around on deck chairs. “What have we got so far?”

“The anchor’s bad,” Cole answered, sitting upright to rub a hand over his shaved head. “I’m not sure I’ll be able to get it up. It’s held out for thirty years and isn’t coming easy.”

“Well we kinda need to get it up,” I replied. “Especially if we’re going to get this baby to a dock.”

“If we need to,” he said, “we can cut it but I’m not sure we’ve got anything that can do the job.”

“I’ll speak to Khasim’s men,” I replied. “How’s the rudder?”

“Looking good,” Gareth answered. “The rudder is good.”

“Anything else?”

“We found a leak,” Charlie said, crossing her boots with a sigh. “Bottom deck is flooded but we can’t be sure why the water level is still.”

“A leak’s bad news,” Gareth groaned.

“It is,” I said, “let’s get down there. Charlie, Cole, you ready for a dive?”

“Aye aye,” they cried. “Already brought the suits up,” Charlie added.

“Sounds good,” I said. “Let’s get going.”

With that Charlie and Cole left. Out of all of us they had the hardest job and from the keen looks in their eye as they made their way below deck, they took it seriously. I nodded approvingly at Gareth as he walked over. He handed me a coffee and we began to carefully pick our way across the open deck where we stood. It looked like it had been a sunbathing area with a nearby bar. Now all that furniture was just broken wreckage left strewn across the floor.

“They’re good guys,” I said. “They’re taking all of this well.”

“It does seem pretty good on paper, doesn’t it?” Gareth said.

We had been hired ahead of any other crew and sent to board the ship on our own. Our job was to have some kind of inventory ready to go the second the buyer’s crew arrived. After that we would organise and manage the repair effort based on our initial reports.

“It does,” I said. “I would say that, except…”

“Nothing about this place feels good?” Gareth asked.

“You have to wonder, don’t you? Looking at all this shit.” I picked up an old handbag that had been lying on the floor. “I know it was a sudden evacuation but I’m not sure the captain went crazy like they say.”

“You think it was something else?” Gareth asked, arching one eyebrow towards me. “This place is creepy but I’ve just been putting it down to nerves.”

“I don’t know.” I shrugged and tossed the handbag to the floor. “It’d help if it was a big story, y’know? If there were articles and interviews with pissed off passengers, standing on some dock with dripping wet hair, moaning about how the captain had abandoned ship for no damn reason.” I showed him the purse I’d taken from the handbag, opening it up to reveal a faded driver’s license. “I just get a funny feeling when I look at stuff like this. I know it was thirty years ago but you’d think there’d be something online, wouldn’t you? The rescue effort must have been huge.”

“You think conspiracy?”

“I don’t know,” I said. “This place just feels weird.”

“It’s just the heeby jeebies,” he replied, doing his best to make us both feel a little better. “Besides… I mean, well we’re here now.”

“True.” I nodded. “You’re probably right. Just the heeby jeebies.”

Gareth chuckled at my use of *probably*.

“I gotta go,” he said. “This conversation isn’t doing me any favours.”

I waited for him to leave, shouting a final thanks for the coffee. He waved goodbye and I watched him turn a corner. Once he was gone I opened the purse again and ruffled through the papers. Most of them were old receipts but something caught my eyes. A folded square of old paper towel, something taken from a dinner table perhaps. It was wrapped around an old dinner knife, the tip snapped off and nowhere to be seen. I unrolled it and found a message written in old lipstick. The writing was desperate, the letters jagged and harsh.

“They hurt me,” it read.

“What the hell is that supposed to mean?” I whispered.

\-

“Get up here!”

Gareth’s voice sounded tinny and distant. I was alone, hearing it filtered through the radio at my waist.

“What is it?” I asked.

“You’ve… to come… fucking nuts… you won’t…”

“Fuck’s sake,” I grumbled. “Alright, where are you?”

“Top deck… it’s… zing!”

“Gareth? You still there?” I cried before resigning myself to a short walk. “This better be fucking good.”

Only when I climbed all the way to the top deck I found it empty. Deck chairs were stacked toward the aft, and parasols, bleached white in the sun, lay torn and lifeless along the floor. Occasionally a gust of wind would catch one of the shredded flaps and it would struggle like a bird with a broken wing, the sudden sound touching a nerve deep inside me. Most of this deck was taken up by a large swimming pool, the scum-covered surface disturbed only by old foam toys and deflated beach balls that floated eerily in the wind. Each one was a furry shape engulfed in algae, pacing those choked waters like patient predators.

Directly ahead was a water slide. A twisting multicoloured tunnel of plastic that rose upwards for thirty feet. It looked faded and pale and was grown over with speckles of green algae. Half-way up one of the sections turned transparent, offering a once-tantalising view of the sea. Something caught my eye up there and to get a better view I walked around the edge of the pool until the acrylic caught the sun and I could see right through it. There was a fuzzy dark shape, something that if I squinted just right looked like it could be big enough for a person. Suddenly my radio flared up and I caught the tail-end of Gareth’s voice.

“…gotta help… stuck… fuck!”

The shape moved silently against the hard plastic. It looked like there could be someone stuck up there. *Is that him?* I wondered.

“Gareth where are you?”

“… up… just… up here!”

It must be him, I decided, and I couldn’t quite work out what to feel about that. I sure as hell wanted to be angry. I had to assume it was him, didn’t I? There was no one else so it had to be! And that meant I’d have to crawl up there and help him out.

And that… I guess that was where my thoughts started to dribble away like candle wax. Because going up there was just about the scariest fucking thing I could imagine doing. It wasn’t just the thought of the danger. It was that place. Even just walking around the pool, stepping quietly over old swimsuits and dropped champagne flutes, I felt as if any second something was going to lunge out and pull me down and I would disappear into that opaque slimy water. The pool would be deathly still within seconds and if anyone came looking, they’d never know I’d even been up there. They’d never even know what happened.

“Gareth!” I cried as I reached the foot of the ladder. “This is… this is a seriously fucking stupid thing you’ve done.”

*I must be alone up here,* I told myself, *barring Gareth. I know I am because nothing else makes sense. No one’s aboard this thing except us. And if I am alone then I have to help. There are no two ways about it. He could get seriously hurt in the time it takes me to find the others. Any feelings I have about those murky waters are irrational. Just like that old church I had to walk past as a kid. It looked scary that was all. This place looks scary but it’s dead. Lifeless.*

*Nothing to be afraid of.*

So I took my first step and immediately noticed the awful noise that rickety frame made. Every footfall on the ladder rattled all that metal and the plastic slides like an earthquake, and it took every ounce of courage to get up there. I’m not often afraid of heights, but up there you felt like you were stood on a collapsing tower. Every gentle turn of the ship was magnified a thousand-fold so that even I started to feel a pang of seasickness.

Not thinking, I crawled towards the tunnel entrance and went in headfirst hoping to get this all over and done with. The plastic was dry as a bone and my hands gripped it easily, so that was something. I pulled myself along at a good pace, uncomfortably aware of how the claustrophobic tube was made for bodies much smaller than mine. How Gareth had thought it was a good idea to go down was beyond me, and I spent most of the way swearing quietly under my breath. The furious muttering as a nice release, enough to keep me going until I reached the acrylic see-through tube.

Somehow, the space before me was empty. I’d arrived at the mid-section only to find a scratched view of the cloudy sky. For a moment I replayed events in my head. *Had I seen what I thought I had? Or had he somehow gotten free? But there was no way he could have gone down. With the way the slide was rocking, I would have noticed. And he definitely didn’t come my way*!

But the proof was before my eyes. He wasn’t there. I was alone.

Or so I hoped.

“Gareth!” I cried. “What the fuck are you playing at!?”

I don’t know why I shouted anything. I hadn’t wanted to hear a reply, not even from Gareth. What I wanted, what was slowly expanding in my mind like a blooming star eclipsing every other thought, was to get the hell out. But something did reply. A thud. A loud and angry sound coming from the very bottom of the tunnel, out of sight. And I didn’t just hear it. I felt it. The tunnel shook. The vibrations passed up my hands.

Another thud, and my whole body locked down with terror. *Something is coming,* I thought. My skin grew cold, my scalp tightened, and my heart started skipping every other beat. There were a few explorative thumps before they exploded into a galloping spring, the owner barrelling up that slide with unseen fury. Something inside me finally broke. I began to backpedal in a crab walk, not even bothering to turn. Only now my hands gripped nothing! The once firm plastic was smooth and slick, and I couldn’t get enough traction to pull myself upwards. I lost all coordination and had to fight with everything I had just to keep myself in one place, my feet kicking black marks into the vinyl and my hands squeaking against the plastic.

I wanted to turn but I couldn’t take my eyes of that bend in the tunnel. *What will come around there?* I thought. *What stinking wet thing is speeding towards me?*

I don’t know if it was sweat or just clumsiness, but eventually what little grip I had gave way. The tunnel seemed steeper than it ever had before and gravity finally started to bear my weight downwards. For long agonising seconds the plastic was as slippery as ice and I was helpless to stop myself moving. My mind turned white hot with terror and all my thoughts were burned away and replaced with a near-hallucinatory state of despair. I screamed the whole way down only to land in that retched green water with a bassy *plunk*, the soup-like water too thick to give off any splash.

I broke the water in a state of total hysteria, gagging as I sucked in lungfuls of rotten miasma. That organic soup had been stewing for three decades and if I had to guess, I was the first thing to break the surface for a long, long time. The result was near-intoxicating, enough to leave me on the cusp of unconsciousness. But I fought to stay lucid and pushed through that stringy muck—its hairy tendrils clinging to my wrists and ankles with an almost-lifelike animation--and heaved myself over the pool’s edge to collapse on the floor. There I lay panting, confused and desperate, only to hear something else come from the pool beside me.

*Kaplunk.*

The water looked undisturbed, but then again it would, wouldn’t it? It was hardly even water, more like a tangle of weeds and slimy algae suspended in ooze. Something was in there, I knew it. It was an irrational thought, one of many I’d had in the last few minutes, but God I was certain that there was something in that damned water!

Another sound.

A loud screech.

The sound of a child riding a slide.

I looked up and saw the waterslide’s mouth rimmed by a dozen pale hands… children’s hands. Their owners crouched out of sight in darkness.

I ran screaming from that deck, unable to wait any longer, unwilling to take the risk of seeing who, or *what*, would emerge from that water.

\-

Gareth found me lowering bags onto the deck of our yacht below, my clothes rancid and dripping wet. I jumped when he called my name, and he jogged over with concern on his face.

“We’re leaving,” I said as soon as he was in hearing range. “We’re getting the fuck outta dodge. Get Cole. Get Charlie. Let’s go.” I could see that Gareth was about to tell me something urgent, but then the state of my clothes caught his eye and he stopped himself.

“What happened?” he asked.

“I… fuck I don’t know,” I said. “Did you radio me to get up on top deck?”

“No.” He shook his head.

“Have you spoken to me at all this morning? After our meeting?”

“No.”

“So you didn’t stay in contact with—”

“What are you on about? I haven’t radioed you once. What the hell happened to you? Did… did you go for a swim!?” he asked incredulously.

“Not voluntarily,” I answered. “And I didn’t go alone.”

“What is that supposed to mea—”

“This place is fucked,” I said. “Something is aboard this ship and it took a shot at me and I’m not about to give it a second chance. Get Charlie and Cole before they dive. Tell them we’re leaving in the next twenty minutes.”

Gareth’s face darkened.

“Cole hasn’t surfaced,” he said. “They went down but he never came back up and Charlie’s down there, passed out. I didn’t want to move her, but I don’t know what’s wrong. Did someone attack you up there? Do you think they hurt Cole?”

I didn’t have time to explain everything to Gareth, so I grabbed him and tried to give him the cliff notes as we hurried to where he’d left Charlie down below. He kept poking holes in my story along the way and oh boy did that piss me off. I had to guess he was just trying to rationalise it, but I felt like he was maybe missing the point. *We weren’t alone*, and that was all I needed to set my ass sailing towards the horizon. By the time we reached Charlie I think I’d certainly spooked the guy a little bit. He looked shaken up. But I’m not sure he believed my story word for word, like he thought I’d maybe taken a tumble and knocked my head on the way down that slide.

Not that it mattered, something I was reminded of when we found Charlie changing out of her suit. She was in a mad rush.

“We need to fucking go,” she cried, scrambling towards us with her things in hand.

“We can’t leave!” Gareth said. “We have to get Cole.”

“Nu uh,” Charlie shook her head. “He’s gone. Whatever the fuck was down there, it got him. We gotta go.”

“You sure?” I asked.

“Yes,” she answered. “I tried. Believe me I tried but… but he’s gone.”

“Let’s go,” I said. “For the love of God let’s just fuckin’ go!”

To our soul-crushing horror, when we reached the railing we found nothing but grey water staring up at us. Perplexed, I reached out and gave the rope a tug, almost as if to check the very truth of my senses. Just a shortwhile ago I’d been climbing that rope and loading the yacht below. By definition, the yacht *had* to be wherever the rope was. They simply had to be together. So how could there be one without the other?

We stood there in a traumatised silence until at last Gareth spoke up.

“What happened down there Charlie?” he asked. “What the fuck is going on?”

\-

“Give it up,” I said as Gareth tried the back up radio for what must have been the hundredth time that hour. “We know Khasim’s men will be here sooner or later.”

“It’s just fucking stupid!” He cried. “It was working this morning, all of them were. How the hell can it be down now? We have a radio. A back up. A back up for the back up. Four different satellite--”

“It’s this place,” Charlie said, her legs pulled up to her chest as she took a long drag from a cigarette. “It’s got us where it wants us.”

“What the fuck does that even mean?” Gareth cried.

“You know *exactly* what I mean,” she said. “I told you plain as day, something *took* Cole. One second he was there, the next he was not.”

“You can’t even say what it is,” he replied. “For all you know he got stuck on something and we could—”

“He was fuckin’ dead Gareth I found his damn mask!”

“There could be an air pock—”

“He’s dead,” Charlie said, slowly withdrawing back into herself, her eyes glazing over. “That leak we found was repaired. We weren’t the first to come here and try patching her up and whatever got the last fuckers before they could pump the water is going to get us next.”

“Charlie,” I said, sitting beside her with deep concern. “It would help me a lot if we knew what we were dealing with? What else did you see?”

She shuddered and took a long slow breath.

“People,” she said. “Or bodies. Lots and lots and lots of ‘em. I’d say two, maybe three dozen. All of them were crew, those white little uniforms gone grey and rotten in the water. I saw a few officers down there I think. They were just bones so it looked almost like coral at first, until I got closer. That was where I found Cole’s mask, sticking out from old ribs and femurs like it’d always been there. But it was his alright.

“All those bones were piled up against one wall like those people had been crawling towards it. Something had been drawn on it, maybe, I don’t know… It looked charred like fire had been taken to it. I couldn’t look at it long though. Seeing that mask, those bones, it just… we’re not alone. I know you don’t believe me but I’m telling you we’re not alone! I wasn’t in that water alone! Things moved. The currents, you could feel them crawling across your skin and the shadows never stayed still. There was something down there just out of sight, always *just* out of my fucking sight. It had me going in circles until my air damn nearly run out. If I’d kept going, kept trying to find it and really lay my hands on it, I would have drowned down there too. You know the last thing Cole said before he went missing? Before something snatched him right out from under my nose? He said, ‘Who’s that?’”

Something about Charlie’s story wormed its way right into my head. I could practically see that place with all those dead skeletons trying to claw their way towards God-knows-what, could sense and feel the deathly silence hanging in the water.

“Fuck,” was just about all I could manage to say, muttering it under my breath.

“Well what do we do now?” Gareth asked.

And that was when someone knocked the door.

“Room service.”

The voice was Cole’s.

\-

“Sir? I’ve been asked to bring you some room service, on the house.”

I couldn’t quite believe my eyes. Cole was standing just outside the door, back straight and arms to his side. A trolley, full of hidden silver dishes, was beside him. He looked paler than he ever had in life, like a powdered corpse. He was shaking and a thin trickle of sweat rolled across his brow, his eyes fixated on some distant spot behind me.

“Cole?”

Charlie heard me say his name and she immediately rushed over and pushed me aside. She saw it was him, really truly him, but before she could get close something stopped her. It was the same thing that had kept me frozen at the doorway. Cole didn’t really look like Cole. It was him, sure. But he looked like he’d gone through the ringer, like he was watching his child’s coffin get lowered into the ground. He kept licking his lips like he was going to say something only he didn’t quite seem sure what.

“Cole what happened to you?”

“Quite the spread, sir,” he said, putting his hand on the trolley’s handle. “It’s… it’s on the house!”

His words were wooden, like a recited script. For some reason I imagined a hostage speaking into a phone with a gun against their head. That was exactly what he looked like. He was expecting something of us, I’m sure but I couldn’t say what. By now Gareth was behind me, every bit as confused as the rest of us.

Cole smiled like he was about to burst into tears, and then he turned stiffly and walked away.

We exchanged brief looks of confusion and immediately followed, calling and shouting for him to stop but he only sped up. He moved quickly as well. Whenever we got close he’d turn a corner and by the time we made it around he’d be way down the corridor, only he never ran. He was always impossibly far ahead after every twist and turn. It was as if he was sprinting when out of sight and slowing to a leisurely walk whenever we got close. *But why?* I thought. *What the hell is he playing at?*

The chase didn’t last long. He soon disappeared from sight and we were left alone in just another one of those endless velvet corridors. I tried to see where he might have gone, but it was useless to look for him. He could have been anywhere. In despondent silence we returned to our room only to suddenly remember the trolley he’d left behind. We lifted each lid and found plates covered in rancid mulch, the food so rotten you couldn’t even tell what it had once been.

“Why would he want us to eat this?” Gareth asked. “Was that even him?”

“I’d like to take a look at the kitchen,” I said. “I’d like to know where this came from.”

\-

The food had been scooped out of some rotten sacks around the back. Ancient vacuum-sealed packs of beef torn open and plopped onto cracked ceramic in a hysterical rush. You could see where he’d dropped plates and old meat and had to start again. You could also see half-a-dozen hypodermic needles littering the ground, and on one countertop was a plain old toolbox filled with every type of sedative you could imagine. It was an old thing, the hinges rusted. But a grimy outline in one of the cupboards, close to the back, let me know it had always been a fixture of that kitchen. I couldn’t help but think of that note I’d found in the old handbag.

*They hurt us.*

“The fucker tried to drug us. Do you think he’s gone nuts?” Gareth asked.

“I think we have a job ahead of us,” I answered. “I think we need to go back to our rooms and figure out our supply situation. I also think we need to work out shifts for keeping a watch during the night.”

“So you think he wants to hurt us?” Gareth nodded towards the toolbox. “I don’t understand what happened to him… We’ve known him for years.”

“I don’t think it’s him we need to worry about,” Charlie answered. “It’s whatever got to him.”

\-

Something was hissing. I was sure of it. I was up late watching over the others and something in the room was letting out a quiet whisper of white static. Gareth and Charlie were both asleep and I was half-way through the midnight watch. At 4am Gareth would wake up and take over and I’d finally get some rest. But until then it was just me and my thoughts, and the deeply worrying sound of Cole occasionally shuffling around somewhere in the distance.

And that hiss.

If only I could figure out where it was coming from, but I was reticent to start walking around in case I woke the others. God, we were tense enough as it was without me worrying over some little thing. I tried to focus on the front door, hoping that whoever else was on this ship would leave us alone.

At least we had a fair amount of supplies. We’d brought enough to last the whole stay, something we owed to Gareth’s peculiarly anxious mind. He was always doing things like that. Stashing away enough food for twice the journey and always bringing back ups for back ups. I quietly thanked him while I drank from a bottle of coke.

I paused with the bottle to my lips, hearing the carbonated bubbles hiss against my lips. I brought the bottle back down and screwed the cap on. The hiss diminished but it didn’t disappear, and when I shook the bottle it rose to a shrill whistle. Carefully examining the lid, I noticed a tiny hole in the plastic. It was so small that when I tipped the bottle nothing flowed out, but once upright the pressure was high enough to force a tiny trickle of air back out.

“What the fuck?” I muttered, speaking aloud for the first time in a few hours.

Only my words had sounded a little slurred.

And my lips had felt a little weak.

I thought of the needles in that kitchen, of the sheer quantity of sedatives tucked away. I rushed over to the stack of bottles we had and began to pull them out, cursing as my arms and legs grew weak and sluggish.

Every bottle had a tiny pin prick in the top.

“Guysh,” I whispered, my limbs so numb I had to crawl my way over to the two sleeping forms. “Sharlie!?”

I reached out and shook her but she did not wake. She was sleeping so heavy she barely looked alive. We’d all been eating and drinking from that stock. It was our own so we’d assumed we were safe, but of course, Cole would have known about it.

“Shit!” I cried, falling backwards and feeling the world start to swim around me. The last thing I heard was the sound of our door opening and Cole muttering quietly under his breath.

“He’s hungry.”

\-

“Dave wake up!”

I had to fight to pull myself up. I’d been left on the floor where I’d fallen, my neck and shoulders badly hurt. Slowly I realised I hadn’t left the room, and I wondered if I’d dreamed the whole thing. Then Charlie spoke again and the nightmare was renewed.

“He’s gone Dave!” Charlie cried. “He’s fucking gone! Gareth is gone!”

I looked around and saw that his sleeping bag was empty.

“He drugged us,” I grunted, grabbing the nearby bottle and handing it to Charlie. “Injected something in the lid. Look.”

“Fuck!” she screamed, hurling the bottle against the wall where it bounced harmlessly onto the floor. “He must have come here when we went looking in the kitchen.”

“ “We need to search for him.” I said.

\-

The medical facility aboard the ship was small, but densely packed with chairs, tables, and dozens of old cabinets. When the ship once sailed there would have maybe been a few medics or a single doctor aboard to treat mild injuries or illnesses, but should anything severe happen, most cruise ships simply turned around and dumped the injured passenger at port to seek medical help on land.

*So why did this one have an operating theatre?* I wondered. When I first saw that gurney with leather straps and an overhead light I thought I simply had to be mistaken. But there was no denying it… the tanks full of nitrous and other gases, the trolley full of rusted scalpels, Jesus… the drain in the floor to collect any blood.

This wasn’t your average professional operating theatre. The straps to restrain the table’s occupant made that pretty clear. It was a small DIY space with no real room to move or do anything except get someone horizontal and begin cutting away with no thought to what came after. The doorway had been hidden behind old filing cabinets that had since toppled over, and you got a powerful sense you were standing in a place that was meant to be a secret.

It had been Gareth’s screams that led us to that place. We never did find him, at least not there and then. But we’d chased those shrill cries for help from one end of the ship to the other until, at last, we’d tracked it to this tiny little space. Charlie said we must’ve been late and I didn’t quite have the guts to say anything else afterwards. That overhead light had been on when we first entered. The padlock to the door opened and lying on the floor. And all along that table were little channels filled with blood that dripped slowly onto the floor ready to circle the drain.

*Yes,* I thought. *We were too late.*

We didn’t find much else to clue us in as to what happened to Gareth, but we did find an old doctor’s bag with paperwork stuffed inside. It didn’t make much sense but reading it… God, you got a horrible feeling you were reading the product of a twisted or broken mind.

*Passenger Soltz will be ready for collection between 0000 and 0200 hours. Do not return later than 0400 hours. Passenger sleeps with company. Observations show they are both early-risers.*

*Passenger Lorin will be ready for collection between 0000 and 0200 hours. Passenger Lorin is in a single occupancy cabin. Observations show she sleeps late due to nightly alcohol consumption. Effects of alcohol withdrawal may be used to mask effect of sedatives. Prepare her cabin appropriately upon her return.*

*Passenger Jacobson will be ready for collection between 1200 and 1400 hours. Passenger Jacobson will be staying with the childcare facility on deck three. Crewmember Fillan will prepare passenger Jacobson for collection. Use of sedatives unnecessary given passenger’s age. Reports of behavioural problems to be prepared for parents’ return at 1800 hours. If parents seek to escalate, the matter may be brought to the medical department where appropriate documents and diagnoses will be devised to diminish the impact of Passenger Jacobson’s narrative.*

*Passengers Morris, Athley, and Supton have been selected for further observation. In the event they are inappropriate for collection, passengers Whettle, Dibson, and Gillet remain potential alternatives.*

*Further notes - Crewmember Aileen Tuson has filed a report with the Captain. She has expressed concern regarding safety of children aboard the ship, citing several mentions of The Hungry Man. This is the third report since she joined the crew four months ago, following complaints regarding kitchen and medical staff. Report was intercepted. Crewmember Tuson was reprimanded for inappropriate conduct with passengers.*

This was only one of dozens and dozens, and if I had to guess there was probably a place somewhere on this ship where we’d find hundreds more. They were not dated but you got a twisted sense of chronology anyway.

*Passenger Donaghy will be ready for collection between 0000 and 0200 hours. Passenger Donaghy will be undergoing his third collection since starting his journey and has consequently stopped eating meals prepared by crew. Sedation is impossible. Prepare appropriately for resistance.*

*Passenger Nguyen will be ready for collection between 1430 and 1500 hours. Observations show that Passenger Nguyen is rarely separated from their spouse. Complaints or official inquiries regarding Passenger Nguyen’s location are to be directed towards complicit members of the medical and officer staff only.*

*Room service personnel are on hand to provide a third, as-yet-unidentified, candidate for collection between the hours of 0000 and 0600.*

*Further notes – the Captain has escalated the situation. His capacity for disruption is significant. We are unable to direct the ship to return to port and collect new passengers. He has reported damage to the hull that is not present and drawn significant attention from the coastguard. Corporate are working towards correcting the situation. Passenger population will return to normal in the coming weeks.*

I handed the last one to Charlie and waited for her to read it.

“I don’t like that corporate reference,” I said.

“I don’t like that Hungry Man thing,” she replied. “What *was* this place?”

I shook my head in confusion and picked up another. This one was considerably shorter.

*Crewmember Fillan will be ready for collection at 0600 hours.*

*Crew should remain vigilant for collection opportunities among remaining passengers. Some activity has been reported in the nursery on deck 3. Surviving passengers have proven difficult to collect, children included. He gives as well as takes. They are changed.*

*Further notes – Given the meagre offerings, decks 1, 2, and 3 are off-limits. It is unlikely He will be satisfied with current supplies. All remaining crew should be prepared for spontaneous collection. Do not resist Him. Corporate report that efforts to return the ship to full functioning are underway, but significant resources are being directed towards containing any information leaks after the recent evacuation. We must bear this period of scarcity with stoicism.*

“Looks like not everyone got off,” I said, handing it to Charlie without looking. “Some of the crew stayed behind. Some of the passengers too. I think this place had something of a cult going on.”

Only Charlie wasn’t listening. She had wandered over to a nearby counter and, opening drawers at random, had found another sheet of paper. It was shaking so badly in her hand I had to reach out and take it just to read the words. She didn’t even resist. She just kept looking at her empty hand, her eyes wide and glistening.

*Passenger Gareth Jones will be ready for collection between 0200 and 0400 hours. Observations show passengers will not sleep alone. Sedatives have been prepared for entire group. Crewmember Cole must wait for sedatives to take effect.*

*Further notes - Passenger Cole Webb has joined the crew. This represents a significant increase to current staff levels. Expect Passengers Jones, Wallis, and Mitchell, to join the crew within the week.*

*It has been lonely.*

*We have given so much.*

*And so has He.*

*His gifts hurt.*

\-

We had barricaded our room as best as we could. Only it didn’t amount for much. This time it was not Cole, or even Gareth as I’d suspected he might, that came for us. It was something else that did not pretend to be anything except a monster. A clicking drooling shuffling thing with broken bones and sagging skin that glistened in the moonlight like rancid meat. It silently pulled our door apart with heavy breaths that gurgled wetly in the dark. You could smell its hunger, its desperation. It did not groan or cry or roar. It only worked towards its prey like a determined predator driven by nothing but a mindless, animal instinct.

It was in the room within minutes.

We could hear it tearing the supplies we’d brought apart. Suitcases were hurled against the wall and toolbags tipped upside down. Its breathing grew rapid and more strained as the thing continued to search for us. Meanwhile we hid in the room two doors down, clutching ourselves in the pitch-black bathroom with our breaths held tight. Only once had I ventured out to the door to look at what was tearing our room apart and the single glimpse had been enough to nearly turn my mind to jelly. Whatever was out there looked human in its general outline but that where the resemblance ended. I couldn’t help but think of what we’d read. *Is this what happens after so many collections?* I wondered. *Is this what will happen to Cole and Gareth if we leave them? Is this what will happen to me?*

I didn’t want those kinds of gifts.

Charlie eventually fell asleep but I never could. I’d heard the thing wander off into the darkness crying in rage and terror. It had wanted so badly to find us and I knew on some level, it would never stop.

\-

“Do you think it’ll float?” she asked.

“I’ll fucking swim the rest of the way if I have to,” I said, giving the tiny lifeboat a kick. We’d thrown it together out of some old double doors and a few empty drums. It was desperate, but so were we. “Besides, we’re betting on the radios and EPIRBs suddenly working out in water which I’m pretty sure they will.”

“You think they can do that?” she asked. “Block our calls for help?”

I thought of what I’d seen in the slide, of those little hands and the quiet *plunk* of something falling into the water.

“Yes.”

We hauled the raft overboard and waited for it to settle. Charlie was clutching the orange dufflebag full of provisions as if it was a child, and I couldn’t blame her. Things had taken a desperate turn and all our hopes were pinned on it. We were getting ready to climb down to it when a loud echoing bang shattered the silence. It sounded like a circuit breaker, like some great machine coming to life. Before we’d even turned we found ourselves bathed in an amber light, and the whole ship was lit up in a mockery of life.

“Go!” Charlie cried and we hurried to the rope ladder. She threw me the bag and I climbed over first and for a brief moment Charlie and I were face to face. We’d spent the whole night couped up in that little room, unable to sleep or relax. And we’d spent all day working on this last-ditch effort at escape. You could see the stress and horror written across her face. She looked like a terrified child, lost and alone in the dark.

And she couldn’t even see what was behind her.

I tried calling out. Tried to warn her. But before I could get a word out she was snatched from before me. Whatever it was it had come out of the nearby window, shattering glass and steel like it was clay. It moved so quickly I barely registered its existence on my retina, but the slightest smear was still enough to leave me paralysed on the ladder, my muscles seized with unspeakable terror.

*The Hungry Man*.

She was gone in an instant, and I was left with a choice. I looked down at the raft. It was still there, bobbing away. It promised a chance to leave, a chance to get off that damned ship like I’d wanted to that very first day. Meanwhile the ship continued to whir into monstrous life, and looking up towards its moonlit silhouette I glimpsed an ancient creaking body crouched on the nearest roof, its spider-like limbs contracted and ready to spring, waiting for me to return. It was like some shadow come to life.

I took a deep breath and climbed down.

\-

They went back. The coastguard went back and looked for them. I told them not to bother only they did anyway, unwilling or unable to believe my story. I hoped that over a dozen crawling from room-to-room had a chance of being safe, although I suspected the ship would not easily let go of fresh meat. Hearing myself say this to them, it was like hearing someone else talk. I spoke of curses and hauntings like a stark-raving lunatic driven mad by exposure. I was surprised they even listened to me and tried to look for the others.

But not as surprised as when they found Gareth.

They took me a little more seriously after that. He’d been found in a random passenger cabin sleeping under the covers. I dread the poor soul who’d first pulled back the duvet only to find themselves face-to-face with the much-changed Gareth. In another time the ship would have taken its pound of meat slowly, and carefully, distributing the load across several passengers each day, with a constant rotation of new ones getting on at each port. If I had to guess, what happened to Gareth was a pride of hungry lions tearing apart a zebra. Something violent and insane…

He died before they got a hundred metres from the ship. I’m thankful for that little mercy, although it breaks my heart to know that Cole and Charlie will never know that peace. I’ve thought about going back, about burning it to the ground or blowing a hole below the water line and letting it sink. Only I can’t go near the water, not anymore. And the thought of seeing that ship rising on the horizon… I could no more return than I could fly to the moon. I simply cannot go back.

Khasim acted like I’d done him a favour. He firmly believed me when I told him it was haunted and he offloaded it as quick as he could to some poor dupe from Bangladesh. Only a little digging showed me it was just another shell corporation for a company *he* owned. I’m not sure he was as ignorant as he claimed. But then again I’m not sure it even matters.

In the end I found an old passenger. A middle-aged woman who’d been there as a child. She’d seemed normal. Or at least… pretty normal. But when I made mention of The Hungry Man she lost all semblance of calm and fell into a total state of hysteria. Her husband threatened me and forced me out. But I guess it wasn’t that that bothered me too much. It was the fact her kids had started crying as well. And for the briefest of moments I’d felt a shadow pass over me and the room had grown a little darker.

And I saw something. Something in the corner of my eye. The kind of thing a mad person might even want to worship as a god.

*His gifts hurt.*

I remembered those words clearly. Whatever had happened to those passengers, I think they took a little piece of it back with them, carrying it inside like a smuggled package back out into the world.