It all started about three weeks ago... That's when I first heard about this piece. This forgotten (or deliberately hidden) symphony that would go on to absorb the rest of my month. Morning Mist.

As part of our Masters course in musicology, we have to produce a thesis. Me and two fellow students decided to investigate the link between mental health and musical composers. That old romantic tale of the tortured genius, suffering for their art. I'm sure your familiar with the cliche.

We were gathered together in the University library, which had served as our base of operations this year. I won't name the specific institution, but it is known for it's vast and ornate library. With high ceilings, a labyrinth of corridors and bookshelves, and row upon row of oak wood tables. All dimly lit with a soporific yellow hue. 

We sat at one of these tables, amongst a pile of books and our lap tops. 

It was Pippa who first broke the studious silence with an audible 'wow' as she read an article on her computer. Sam looked up, and I raised a quizzical eyebrow. For the record, Pippa is a lovely girl, and a good friend. She's also extremely clever. Which is why I find her penchant for the paranormal so baffling. She religiously checks her horoscope every week, and is regularly updating us on the latest ghostly goings on (according the the myriad of questionable podcasts she subscribes to). 

So when she exclaims 'wow', I tend to take this with a pinch of salt. I was ready to ignore it and continue reading, but Sam took the bait and asked her "what'cha reading Pip?"

She looked up. "Have you ever heard of a composer called Vassily Petrov?" 

Neither of us had.

"Apparently he was a composer in Soviet Russia. He generally wrote pretty middle of the road music, for the politburo events. Nothing spectacular, probably why we've never heard of him. Then in the late 40s he was arrested by the secret police and sent to a gulag for 5 years."

"Nothing too 'wow' inspiring so far" I said skeptically. 

"But listen to this" she went on. "When he was released people say he had been driven mad by the experience. He was still composing. But crazy atonal symphonies that would make Stravinsky blush. Stuff no orchestra wanted to play. He eventually hung himself in 1956. Just after finishing his final piece, called 'Morning Mist'. But check this out... This is his suicide note, how creepy is this:

I have seen terrible things. Things no human should see. And everytime I close my eyes these visions are burned into my retinas. Music has been my only solace these last few years. But I know my pieces are deranged, and will never be performed. If there is anyone left to cry for me, I beg them not to. I feel like i am already dead, I died a long time ago, in that terrible place. And I have only been a ghost of my former self since. 

"And here's the crazy part..." Pippa quickly added. "There's a postscript... It reads:

PS. On my desk is a manuscript where I have penned my final piece. Please destroy it. It should never be played or performed. It has a melody in that are not for mortal ears. I can't explain it, I feel like some dark energy channelled through me, and forced my hand to compose. I've tried to hide it in the music. But I still hear it over and over in my mind. It is this violin line that has driven me to take my own life"


"Oooh... Spooky" Sam said with a smile. "I mean, this guys definitely nuts. Add him to the list! Vassily Petrov".

"There's more..." Pip said. "This article said the only surviving copy of the manuscript is..." She did a drum roll with her fingers on the table "right here in this library!"

"I guess people didn't take his advice and destroy it," I said. "Okay... Creepy pasta stuff aside. I think it's a good case study to see the kind of music someone composes with post traumatic stress. I'm in. Sam and I will look for it, you keep researching online". 

*************

Our search lasted all night. With no results. It wasn't under V for Vassily, or P for Petrov. Or indeed M for Morning Mist. But... According to the online records there was a copy in the library somewhere. So we continued the search, all week. It was just to intriguing to let go off.

It wasn't until the Friday when I was sweeping over a section of the library I'd already covered. In a secluded corner, deep in the maze of corridors. I don't know what made me do it, but I started pulling books of the shelf and checking behind them. There was a gap where manuscripts could easily fall.... I reached into the darkness and felt around for...

"Got it!" I said as I walked back to the table smiling and waving the papers in my hand. I was treated to a miniature round of applause from my study partners as we excitedly laid it out on the table.

"Jesus" Pip said as we began reading through. All the pages were yellowed with time, and it had a damp, rotten smell eminating from it. But it was the way it was written that elicited our mutual shock. I'd never seen a score like this.

It was written frantically, with strange markings and unrecognisable directions on. Strange unintelligible notes were scribbled in the margins. 

"Shall we start analyzing?" I asked the team.

"Before we do... And I know what you're going to say.." Pippa said.

Here it comes I thought...

"I've been reading up online. And they say the piece is cursed." I rolled my eyes, but she continued. "Seriously look."

She pulled up some tabs on her browser. They were news articles relating to the mysterious music. 

Petrovs close friend, who inherited his compositions after his death was the first. He had the manuscript to Morning Mist. He died under mysterious circumstances a few days later. Reports were he poisoned himself. According to the article he had the manuscript laid out on his table in the room when he died. 

The next was a amatuer orchestra in Russia in the 70s. They tried to perform the piece. But in first rehearsal, the lead violinists went berserk half way through. Started stabbing people with his bow. Almost killed one of them

The last was was in the 90s. It had made its way to a library in America. Some musical prodigy kid checked it out. Two weeks later it says he shot up his school and then turned the gun on himself. Once again, in his bedroom he had clearly been studying this piece of music.

"Pshh... Bollucks. What even are these websites. Ghosthunters.org... paranormal times. Im sure Rachmaninoffs Isle of the Dead is far scarier that this piece".

Pippa looked uneasy. As to be honest did Sam. But we went ahead anyway. 

We decided the best thing to do would be to try and recreate the score on the computer.  For anyone who doesn't know, you can create each part, line by line using software. this was no easy feat though. The piece was incredibly complex. And all the strange markings took weeks to decipher. 

There was also this strange feeling we had as we worked on it. You know that feeling when you're being watched. That makes the hairs on the back of your neck stand up.

At Pippa's request we never listened to the whole piece as we worked. Only short snippets.

I have to admit. Even these snippets were disconcerting. They were cacophanic and disorientating. I had listened to a full 20 seconds and I had to admit I felt a little sick afterwards. And we still hadn't even added the lead violin line.

Sam had an alternative theory to Pippa's 'cursed violin melody' hypothesis. He had been reading that much like subliminal advertising. Where old TV ads would flash imperceptible images on screen to try and make viewers subliminally want to buy a product. Music could work the same way. Different frequencies superimposed together could have a disorientating effect.

Still a stretch to see how this could make someone harm themselves or others. But we proceeded with caution none the less. We even split up the violin line. So I did the first section. Sam the second. Pippa the last. So none of us heard the whole thing.

After a few sleepless nights, we finished transcribing it onto the computer software a few days ago. But still none of us have listened to it in its entirety.

Which leads me to today. We've hired the big studio on campus to finish our work and have a listening party. As is customary on a big project.

But this has proved quite contentious. As I write this, we have it loaded up on our computer and ready to play through the high end speaker system. I'm keen to click play. It's no doubt creepy, but there's no such thing as a 'cursed piece of music' and I don't buy Sam's theory of subliminal messaging. 

Pippa has said she will leave the room, but is imploring us not to listen either. 

Sam is on the fence and has the deciding vote. But he needs convincing. 

Do you guys think we should press play?