[Part 1](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/m4o6mo/i_went_to_a_catholic_boarding_school_the/)

We made preparations for the next night.

Two interesting things that we noticed – and that supported our theory – was that the hallucination always showed the same students and nuns as monsters, and that neither of the non-human students slept in our dorm.

So it obviously meant that, if they were *actually* monsters, there was a whole other dorm for them. If we carefully followed one, we’d find out.

We took the pills on an empty stomach, then headed for the refectory, trying to stay away from the insanely scary sight of the blind nun. 

“Do you know who she is?”, I asked. Both Martina and Leo had enrolled around the same time as me, but a few days earlier.

“All I know is that she only teaches the eight-graders. I never met anyone older so I have no intel on her.”

Our school only covered fourth to eight grade, with around 40 students/residents per year. Considering that, the countryside building was disproportionally big. 

One of the monsters joined the three of us for dinner; it was Lizzie, one of the smartest girls in our class. Her normal appearance was of a freckled girl with glasses and pigtails but, as a monster, she was a humanoid fox with three tails and wearing a mask over her face.

“How’s your dorm like?”, Martina boldly asked. The two of us were still recovering from the shock, and I even said a quick silent prayer to thank God for sending one of the most normal-looking monsters. I couldn’t stand to talk to one of the other things that were roaming around the dining room or sitting on the other tables.

Lizzie gasped almost imperceptibly, and then recited seemingly rehearsed lines.

“It’s normal, I think? But our overseer is Sister Agostina and she’s pretty strict so we have to be in bed perfectly punctually.”

That was something I always noticed, but never questioned. It seemed like a trivial fact in the back of my mind until Martina pointed that out.

Ten minutes before the curfew, Lizzie got up.

“Thanks for keeping me company today. I should get going. I want to brush my teeth before there’s a huge line.”

Her voice seemed forcefully cheerful.

“Good night, Lizzie.”

Martina bit her lip. “She’s pretty nice. I really want us to be wrong and give a good laugh about it later.”

“Yeah, me too. Did you manage to create the distraction?”

“Don’t take me lightly, Mr. Leonidas.”

The after-dinner curfew was 10 PM and, while the kids from our dorm stalled a little, the others were almost militarily disciplined, and one minute before that time, you couldn’t see any of them around.

There was no turning back now.

Precisely three minutes before ten, Ariana, Martina’s roommate, started screaming desperately as she profusely shat her pants in the middle of the dining room. Chaos ensued, as kids ran around screaming – some of them covered in splashes of liquid poop –, and all the nuns present had to intervene.

Ariana was a bully and constantly stole nice snacks the other kids got from their families, so I didn’t feel that bad. All Martina did was leaving a giant bag of sugar-free gummy bears lying around, it’s not like Ariana didn’t have a choice…

As the turmoil unfolded, the three of us were able to sneak to the corridor that led to the other dormitory.

At first, it was as normal as ours – richly furnished and full of paintings of former abbesses and popes. But it ended in a large, dark and cold room that was nothing like our accommodations.

After our eyes adjusted to the dark, the three of us covered our mouths in a nearly fruitless effort to not scream.

Instead of nice rooms full of sunlight and comfy beds, the other dorm was nothing but a torture chamber.

Lizzie, the kitsune, had her body completely chained mid-air, forming an X with her arms and legs. A lot of the other creatures were like that, or inside sarcophaguses that were slightly too small for their size; and that were the nice lodgings.

“Let’s see who was bad today”, Sister Maria, a Math teacher with pupils of fire, her eyes moving across the room as the cornered and helpless beasts whimpered. She then pointed to a misshapen figure of a hunchback boy with an evil-looking spare skeleton attached to his back.

Back then I had no idea what that was, but now I know it’s called a dybbuk, a being from the Jewish lore that supposedly consisted of a normal body possessed by the spirit of an evil deceased person with unfinished business. In reality, they are actually the same body and mind, with the uncanny ability to walk both among the living and the dead.

A perversion of the nature that the Church could never leave alone.

Sister Maria, a tall and strong woman who was probably in her early 40s, grabbed him by the skeletal ribcage and threw him inside an iron maiden.

“What do you have to say, monster?”

“I… I promise to be good from now on. I promise to serve God.”

“Good. Now atone.”

I’ll never forget how the screams of the poor dybbuk pierced my ears, my mind, my very soul.

Leo was trembling; we were precariously hiding behind a row of sarcophaguses and we didn’t have the luxury of talking or moving; who knew what these twisted people would do to us if they knew that their secret was out?

Sister Maria then proceeded to put others inside iron maidens and Spanish boots; the lucky ones slept on the bare floor, cold and constantly stained with the blood of the tortured ones.

What shocked me the most was realizing that, other than monsters, they were kids. They were from other species, but they were small and relatively fragile individuals. None of them was much taller than us. Especially when you looked at the vampires and other nearly-human beings – they were the equivalent of a 10-years-old, just like us.

“Sister Agostina, start the chanting.”

“Yes, ma’am.”

The two of them then proceeded to chant in Latin for no less than an hour. Martina was visibly antsy, being the first of us to realize that Sister Cecilia, the overseer of our dorm, was going to notice we were missing.

We had no choice but to watch the macabre ritual, sprinkled by the screams of the damned, motionless and silent as a lion waiting for its prey – except that we were the ones that could be preyed on.

After they finally finished, Sister Maria loosened a few pieces of the devices to attenuate the torture, as she declared that God forgave them. And then she left the room, leaving her colleague alone with their (there’s no other word) prisoners. 

“The three of you behind the coffins. My office, now.”

 

[PPT](https://www.reddit.com/r/PPoisoningTales/) | [TCC](https://www.reddit.com/r/TheCrypticCompendium/)